 For those of you who are not psychology majors, some explanation might be necessary. The Nature vs Nurture debate is one of the most notorious ones in psychological research and it addresses the question of the source of a problem – is there a genetic basis (nature) or is it due to environmental factures (nurture). To your rejoice, I won’t dig that much into science. the big picture we will be trying to figure out is why is it so hard for Protosses to do well compared to the other two races. Are there problems with the tech tree or the racial balance? Is it due to lack of solid players to push the race forward? Is it Kerrigan’s doing? Is it Enron’s doing? I hope that after some hefty quibbling we can start to understand the situation and work towards a wise and mature conclusion. Hopefully. When trying to apply the psychological concept of “nature” to a game such as StarCraft, we must carefully think of what does it entail. In this case this is pretty simple – every race in StarCraft has two major components that define it: units with all their relative aspects such as cost, build time, damage, etc.; and tech tree which is where are we headed and how do we get there. Unit-wise, Protoss seems to be doing fine. With powerful early and mid-game units such as the Stalker, Immortal and Sentry and late-game beasts like the Colossus and the Hight Templar, the obscenely yellow race has basically everything covered. Few exceptions exist but we will examine them below as part of the tech tree because their under-usage seems to be dictated by being forced to make “the other choice”. Thus, we reach the conclusion that if anything is genetically wrong with Protoss, it must lie somewhere in the tech. And I just might know the spots. Many comparisons to BroodWar can and will be made, because it is there that the Protoss race truly shines with many years of development and the help of not one or two revolutionists. And before gnawing me for this seemingly obvious and misplaced statement and saying that SC2 is far too young, we should first try to answer the question “Can the current Protoss ever end like his predecessor?” Does it have the sufficient backbone to support a progress to perfection? Thus far, the answer seems a bit out of reach. I would like to start with one of the grandest issue Protosses might be having. As it was in BroodWar, Protoss units have remained expensive and hard to get. And although the Warp Gate tech has solved some of the problems with building times, everything that is Protoss still requires its fare share of money. But here comes the important difference: in BroodWar, the race had means to overcome this drawback. In BroodWar, they had the Reaver, which was more than just an AoE damage dealer: it was Protosses’ most efficient way to keep their enemies at bay while getting their economy up. That is why Reaver openings were applicable in every single match-up and we saw them more than ¾ of the times. They served multiple purposes from evening economies, coercing retreats and forcing Turrets and gas on Scourges. Now, I am not saying that the SC2 Protoss must reclaim this particular unit. He just needs a way to get even economy-wise with his opponents. With Storm dealing less damage than it used to and the Colossus being too valuable to risk, current Protosses have no way of dealing significant economy damage once the early game ends. Sure, they can chrono boost their economy and try to get even from the beginning but again this is just a temporary, until-the-mid-game solution. Once the macro phase sets in, Protosses find that they are fighting an uphill battle against the MULEs or the ridiculous droning capabilities of Zerg. And at the end of the day, the nature of Protoss forces him to offensively take expansions if he wants to survive. That, however, can be quite risky, especially in PvT with Terrans having gone way more mobile than in BroodWar. Do not be quick to judge the words above even if you do manage to be even with your opponents. The current state of the game might be very misleading because nobody is yet Jaedongly good and 2-basing-till-the-end seems to be a perfectly fine solution. As the game progresses further, though, and build orders get calculated to the last mineral, things will start to change drastically. And while on the subject of metallic, crawling monsters, we should throw an eye on their birthplace: The Robotic Facility. Since day one of the beta I’ve had the strangest feeling that something is wrong with this building and it hit me just recently while watching a game where I saw a triple robo! The Robo Facility has been drastically remade since the BroodWar days and now it is no longer “the building for the cute units”. It is now a major production facility with equal importance to the gateway; it has become the Protoss factory! This makes us go back to the money matters. In BroodWar, Protosses had a smooth progression of their Robo tech. First, they got the Robo facility and warped a Shuttle while waiting for the support bay. Then they would get a Reaver (followed by Observer after observatory) and marched on to destroy SCVs. Everything ran smoothly, step-by-step. No we get this huge shift and Protosses are given Immortals and Colossi which are required to be en masse. And as we know, a single Colossus or Immortal rarely does you any good outside PvP. That is if you ever reach robo tech. Thus, suddenly, to effectively spam robo units Protosses find it necessary to get more than one 200/100 building in order to mass 250/100 Immortals or 300/200 Colossi. And some people try to do it off of one base and later wonder why they die to a Marauder ball. It is financially crippling and you lose a bucketful of economy without a mean to catch up. Not to mention all that makes the Warp Prism obsolete, because how would you sneak it in-between Observers, Immortals and Colossi. There is just no time; and no money too. And now with the “obsolete” issue on track, it would be a nice time to mention that Protoss is still the only race in the game with entire parts of its tech tree being complete rubbish. I am talking, of course, of the Fleet Beacon tech and the shitty Carriers and Motherships that come with it. Why would anyone go for Carriers as their Tier 3 choice when you have a unit that deals splash, has more range, costs less, builds almost twice as faster AND benefits from your ground upgrades that you need to stay alive? This puts Protoss in hugely disadvantageous position to the other races, which seem to be in full satisfaction from their tech. Seriously, the FB end of Protoss is so useless and superfluous that even a cold-hearted amputation would not do the trick. I will cut here in order to not be of torment to the reader with a more enormous piece of text. Expect the second part of the feature in a couple of hours and in the meantime feel free to share with us your thoughts on the matter. As you read just above in the introduction, the nurture of Protoss deals represents the life of the race in the current metagame and how is it managed by its users and how does it do when facing the other two species. One must consider the fact, that the environment always plays a role in all situations and as it changes so do the outcomes and results of one's actions. We boldly tried to look into the future in Part 1 of this article when trying to predict if genetics of Protoss will impose a permanent (or at least a long-lasting) effect on its performance, but here we will turn our gaze solely to the current state of the game. When looking at the current race pool in most major tournaments, one cannot deny one simple fact - there are quite a lot of Terrans out there. And while this is NOT an implication of Terran being overpowered, imbalanced, retarded or anything you can think of, the fact that PvT is the harder match-up among the non-mirrors stands true. And when pure statistics start talking there is not much place to hide - Protosses are forced to play the match they don't like much, much more than the one they do like. As of now, it is much more up to the Protosses to find solutions to their problems. And although such have started to appear - the 4-gate pressure continues to be diversified by new ways of doing it and a safe way to early expand has also been found - there are still some troubles that they face past at the mid-game. The Colossus builds are still very fragile at times due to being easily countered by on-time scouting and a Viking switch, and pro-gamers in the better part still seem to count Storm builds as Plan B. The latter might be because of fear of EMP but overall Chargelot/Storm builds seem more stable than Colossus ones. This one element of the Protoss play is especially connected to the nature aspects we discussed in Part 1. Protoss players seems to be the only one that do not care for harassing enemies' economies and try to come ahead in the simpler way by just overexpanding and overprobing their opponents. And while in many games that would be a viable strategy, in highest level of competition this is sometimes not an option. What BroodWar and SC2 players alike have found is that you can rarely get away with a new Nexus when one is behind in some way, especially army-wise. Every race faces such situations at least several times in each tournament and so far Zergs and Terrans seem to be the only one using economy harassment to uppermost effectiveness by doing Zergling run-byes, Mutalisk harass, Medivac drops and early Banshee pressure. Which baffles me because Protosses certainly possess the means to do economy damage with the newly buffed Phoenixes and the Psi Storm drop (which, although weaker than in BroodWar, can still cause significant havoc) but which even top players often neglect. As rare sight the Prism usage might be, I still get shocked by the inability of many players to do it correctly. As far as the majority of the Protoss users are concerned, the Warp Prism is considered much more a flying Pylon than an actual dropship so they will fly to the location, phase the Prism, start warping-in units and then proceed with their plan, completely stultifying the mobility of the unit. And while this is fine for some situations, that is not the case while trying to harass mineral lines. When a top-tier player needs less then two seconds to spot a red dot on his map and react, one cannot afford to spend thrice the time before the harass actually begins. That leads to the inevitable sniping of the whole operation and Protoss feels far behind as the Warp Prism play has already cost both money and Robo build time. At the end of the day, the biggest mistakes Protoss users make is being obvious. Despite the vast options of tech deviations Protosses have before themselves and almost all of them viable and competitive, they keep sticking to only several openers and mid-game plans which pro-gamers have learned to successfully read even with partial scouting. Robo tech seems to be the choice of the majority of players and, while strong, it remains easily countered by proper timings and good micro management from the opponent. 4-Gate pressures also enjoy a high percentage among Protoss users but suffer the same cons as the Robo tech - they are easily scoutable, extremely predictable and, in addition, have a semi all-in aspect because of the economy restrictions they impose on the player. The players might not be the only one that are to blame for the choices they make. One might argue that it is the metagame that forces them to take certain tech paths because the alternatives are far less effective, but I believe that the roots are in the gamers themselves, who impose a virtual stagnation upon their race. This is all for the time being, of course. As we mentioned above, Protosses keep finding new ways to battle their opponents but a steady evolution might just not be enough in the current situation. With the pro-scene developing ever so rapidly, one strongly feels the need of a new Bisu or Nal_ra to turn the race upside-down and bring upon a revolution that will have its effect for years to come. In the end, it is always hard to determine the winner in this debate. But for what it's worth I would put my money in the 'Nurture' basket as the main perpetrator of the Protosses' misfortunes. The race clearly has huge potential and is by no means weaker than the other two, but it seems to be used improperly for the better part of high-tier matches. It remains to be seen when or if a diversification in playstyles will occur and how the future build orders will change the placement of Protoss overall. "Day, funny and interesting events that happen while the masters train hard for upcoming tournaments, epic 40-minute matches, live commentary, build-order revolutions, and anything else worthy of the spotlight. The main goal is to keep you informed of the many fascinating and potentially overlooked things going on in the SC2 world. I want you to be more involved. I want you to read and lurk more. I want you to watch more SC2! of this feature with one of my absolute favorite players - EG's own Greg "IdrA" Fields. For those not familiar with Greg's stream, he broadcasts almost daily, streaming ladder games as he attempts to hold the top position in the North American Grandmaster League. Idra's stream is usually scarce of words, with only the unrelenting dubstep soundtrack to fill the void. But the VOD you will see below is different. After reaching 20K viewers on and winning a bet with JP McDaniel, Idra chose to do an unprecedented live commentary on his games. And although it is nice to hear Greg's voice alongside the clanking of his keyboard, the focal point of this feature actually comes at the end of the 2-hour VOD. Thirty minutes before the end of the broadcast, IdrA provides another service to his fans and hops on twitter to answer some of the many questions posted at and comments with his usual unreserved manner of speaking, discussing balance issues, other pro-gamers, his future career plans, and a recent argument with another popular community figure. In case you are at work, have a sleeping baby by your side, or are trying to listen to Artosis giggle while commentating GSL, I present to you a short excerpt from this Q&A series with the talented Zerg: In the spotlight box below, you can find the VOD from which those quotes are taken. Although the entire two hours are worth watching, you can hop to ~1:32:00 when the Q&A begins. Feature spotlight: IdrA's Q&A Watch live video from eg_idra on Justin.tv As I promised above, we will aim to deliver similar features every week, bringing you the most enticing pieces of stream events by your favorite pro-gamers. However, as neither myself nor GosuGamers is omnipresent, if you stumble upon a segment you think is must-see material, feel free to report it by following the steps below: Send us an e-mail at kegare.tenshi com that - Has "Streamspotting" in the subject. - Has a link to the VOD in question. - Specifies the time at which the segment in question occurs. - Has a short description of why it is interesting. So that is all for this week - I will see you again in seven days, when I will bring you a piece of stream from another kick-ass player. Tune in to GosuGamers.net next Monday, and until then - "...you can see stuff like invisible Marines protecting a Mothership so she can Vortex the hell out of the Zerg units while Carriers obliterate every remaining resistance; the power of the Vortex/Thor combo; and how to survive an unstopping double-Zerg aggression while mining your last mineral patches."To be honest, initially I had no idea what stream should I put my accent on for this week's edition because, you see, this is all new to me. Fortunately, a Twitter post mentioned something very streamspottable that averted my attention from all those Zerg streams that usually eat all my free time. Thus I found myself browsing the stream channel of one of the best North American terrans and member of team Dignitas - Kyung Hyun Ryoo, who, according to the aforementioned tweet was playing some sick 2v2s with FXOptikZero. For those of you who do not know who SeleCT actually is - and, for the record, I don't believe such people actually exist, Mr. Ryoo is a beastly master of the Terran metal and one of the most solid and accomplished players in North America. He holds many impressive achievements like two top-threes at MLG events (second at D.C. 2010 and third at Dallas 2011), another two top-threes at FXOpen Invitational #1 and FXOpen Shatter the Sky (taking silver medal at the latter) and a bronze medal at the recent IPL Season #1. Now I am really grateful for whoever tweeted this event (I don't remember the name, you see, because I usually do my streamspotting around 3 a.m. so blank spots due to lack of sleep often occur), but I would be even more grateful if he had mentioned that Fortunately, Nydra is here to highlight so you don't have to. : Power + Protech. The long game places our T/P heroes against the unrelenting assault of the enemy Zerg/Terran combo. Struggling to survive and hold the defense, SeleCT utilizes his flawless mechanics to do blue flame harass and keep his opponents pinned down as much as possible. The big engagements in the center that start to pop up after the 20-minute mark are a pleasure to watch as Void Rays, Tank, Brood Lords and standard tier 1 units die fiery deaths. But 2v2 is not all about massive macro clashes. Apparently. who had teamed up with Major from team Sixjax. The two games that are played between those two teams are a nice example of how to execute a fast DT rush, how not to die while doing it and how does one transition out of it when it fails to do any damage. Another nice game occurs at 1:20:00 of Part 1 and although you should probably check it out, it is just a prelude to what I really want to talk about. If you don't have much time to spare (and I guess 8 hours of stream VODs can indeed by classified as time consuming...), you should just check the first hour and a half of Part 3, as it is by that time that SeleCT and OptikZero truly go crazy. In several games they display some perfect team play and ; the power of the Vortex/Thor combo; and how to survive an unstopping double-Zerg aggression while mining your last mineral patches. Yes, you guessed right: now is the time to check SeleCT's stream! Feature spotlight: SeleCT's 2v2 marathon Watch live video from dignitasselect on Justin.tv I guess this is enough writing for today, after all my intention is for you to go watch this (and other) stuff, so next time you see something of interest you can recommend it to me. Because Send us an e-mail at kegare.tenshi com that - Has "Streamspotting" in the subject. - Has a link to the VOD in question. - Specifies the time at which the segment in question occurs. - Has a short description of why it is interesting. "New builds are coming out during every tournament that are looking forward to diversify the match-up and make it more interesting for watching and playing. And here comes Artosis, bringing us a neat defensive build, centred around Chargelots and, later, +1 attack and Archon, amalgamated in a deadly push." In the process of writing this feature I kinda grew to loath it. For several reasons. First of all, it made me miss the new episode of Game of Thrones, which, as you may guess, is not regarded as a positive start of the day. Second, I will be helping Protosses improve this week and this turns my Zerg heart upside down. But hey, after all it is Protosses defeating Stemkoski. Despite his contradictory performances as StarCraft 2 pro-gamer, Artosis is one of the most knowledgeable commentators and analysts and his words of wisdom can be heard every week at the GSL. The half of the casting archon started his SC2 career as a Zerg player switched to Protoss at the beginning of 2011. Now this is not the place to discuss this decision, we are here to see what the ingenious player has come up with while playing with the children of Aiur in the volatile, unforgiving PvP. PvP has indeed evolved a lot more from its "4-gate-all-the-way-till-someone-eventually-dies" pattern. New builds are coming out during every tournament that are looking forward to diversify the match-up and make it more interesting for watching and playing. And here comes Artosis, bringing us a neat defensive build, centred around Chargelots and, later, +1 attack and Archon, amalgamated in a deadly push. The stream excerpts are taken from games on the Korean master ladder and I want to put attention on two different build orders that lead to the same end. The first game is , rushing to charge by putting Twilight Council immediately after Cyber Core is finished. To defend any possible pressure, Artosis throws down a Forge and a few Cannons to be even more safe. After Charge and +1 are started and 200 gas are collected, a Templar Archives is put down, that will be used to get the Archon on the field. Three more Gateways are build to complete the composition. In the second game on Shattered Temple, Artosis is being denied any scouting and not knowing if there will be aggression from his opponent, and thus goes for four gates first so there is no high chance of premature death. He then follows it up with the finishing touches of the build order: Council, Charge, +1 attack, Templar Archives. 4 Gateways 1-2 Cannons for defence 1 Charge upgrade 1 +1 Attack upgrade 1 Archon 2 Stalkers Lots of Zealots So there are some things you need to notice about the build and the reasons behind it. Massing Zealots frees you up gas so you can tech more efficiently. Secondly, it is wise to get two Stalkers out for several reasons: you can kill scouting probes AND it doesn't give out your tech intentions. With two Stalkers and a Zealot it would look like a standard 4-gate opening. Thirdly, don't rush, be patient and defend. You need thise +1 attack, the charge and the Archon to have maximum efficiency. Lastly, you should know about the largest flaws of the build. Most importantly, you will be playing in the dark, as this is a turtle build with no robo, so all the information you will get will be from you scouting probes, which most of the time won't see anything, because stalkers will shoot them down. Also, this opening might be hugely susceptible to Stalker pressure, backed up with good micro. This might be solvable, though, and I haven't seen a thousand games with this opening to be adamant, but it is what it looks like from bystander's point of view. I know it is probably not the most refined build in the universe. I don't even know if it will become viable at a competitive level. What I know is that I like it. It's interesting, different, it's not a 4-gate (well, technically, there are four gates but you catch what I mean) and it is pleasant to watch. So go, watch the games, learn the style, improve it and pwn noobs if you can! Feature spotlight: Artosis and his PvP Watch live video from artosis on Justin.tv I hope this issue of Streamspotting was useful to you and you will enjoy the games in it, as they are, as a bonus, commentated by Artosis himself, so at least you will get a good entertainment out of them. Have fun! Send us an e-mail at kegare.tenshi com that - Has "Streamspotting" in the subject. - Has a link to the VOD in question. - Specifies the time at which the segment in question occurs. - Has a short description of why it is interesting. , a very extraordinary PvZ on one of the largest maps in SC2 - Tal’darim Altar. MC spawns at the 1 o’clock position while Losira spawns at 5 o’clock. Both players start with very safe standard openings. MC goes for a Forge/Fast expand build, while Losira opens 14 gas 14 pool. Some zergs may prefer hatch first builds but this one is much safer against any type of cannon rush that is very likely to happen on this map. MC sends a scouting probe after his first pylon but as he could not find his opponent at the first place he checks (the 11 o’clock), he sends a second probe right after he puts up his forge at 12 food. Both scouting probes reach their destinations - the 7 and 5 o’clock positions - at the same time. The reason behind scouting with 2 probes is the urge to find and see what your opponent is doing. Losira could be doing a 6-7 pool rush which is soft-countered by a quick scout or he could be going for a hatch first build in which case MC would cannon rush, block the entrance and force a cancel on the hatch. But as MC sees his opponent going for a safe build he puts up his nexus and plays safe as well. In the mean time, he tries to hide his second probe on the bottom of the map in order to use it later but Losira had an overlord spotting it. After talking about the openings lets skip forward a little to the intersting parts of the game. . Most of the good zerg players would avoid putting hydra den that fast because making enough hydras to stop air harassment would cost the zerg a lot. Hydras are a bit inflexible when attacking the opponent because the distance between the bases on Tal'Darim Altar are too long and hydras are extremely slow off creep. But Losira had something else in his mind. The downside of the nydus play is that it is not easy to put a nydus in your opponent's base, especially when you have someone as good as MC, who would probably see it right away and kill before it pops. Back in the base of Losira, MC tries to do more damage by sending 2 more void rays but he could only kill an extractor and is then forced to fly back when he sees 4 hydras and a queen. Losira moves all his hydras and the queen into the nydus and unloads them via a worm in front of MC’s natural. MC doesn't see the nydus building because it is placed perfectly just outside of the vision range. . MC pulled his probes back instantly but he doesn't have much to defend so he uses his probes alongside his army and with some miracle micro MC managed to win the battle inside his base and kill that nydus warm. The battle was won but the overall victory was far from MC's grasp. He lost 25 probes just to push Losira out of his base. As Losira initiates a tactical retreat, his nydus infront of MC’s natural was still up and the creep has reached the first line of protoss buildings. Losira was 40 supply and 23 workers ahead, all he had to do was to make a killing blow. But MC still had a considerable defence at his entrance with 3 cannons, 2 zealots, 3 phoenixes, 4 sentries and an immortal. Losira slowly started to push from the front but just enough to kill the buildings at the entrance one by one, while continuing to rally more and more units through the nydus. The killing blow came from yet another nydus worm popping up at the bottom of MC’s main. Losira pulls all his units into the nydus and comes out from behind MC’s army. MC tried to put a last stand but it was impossible to defeat an army of 22 hydras without any AoE damage even with a perfect micro. Finally MC gg’ed and Losira was the one to play in the grand finals of MLG Columbus 2011. Zerg opens 14 gas/14 pool 6:06 Lair starts, 7:30 hydra den goes down after lair is completed 8:26 the nydus network is put down 9:27 the first worm starts to build, 10:25 second worm goes up while the attack at the front is under way 13:49 a third worm is put into MC's main In this game Losira showed us a very good way to combine mobility of the nydus network with the dps of slow moving hydras. I hope that you guys will enjoy watching this replay and follow our replay section for more interesting games to come. Many contenders have left significant trails behind them after their appearance at the GSTL. Some played an amazing game or two over a heavy favourite and then disappeared but helping their team to win nonetheless. Others got famous because of all-kills. The third type showed consistent performance both in the team league and individual tournaments alike. In this first "East in Heaven" feature we take a look at all three types of GSTL phenomena, tracing their steps back from where they started up until where they end in regard to current performances. If you haven't watched GSTL closely you probably would not remember those two from the top of your head. But these guys have impressed me more that I would imagine. made his one and only appearance in GSTL February and haven't played a single televised game since. Thus, if you are now asking yourselves why the hell is he even mentioned, you are probably forgetting what this youngster actually accomplished. Seed is responsible for Incredible Miracle's victory over Old Generations in the first GSTL and when the two rosters met right in the first round of the tournament and journalists, casters and fans were quick to say that "this could very well be the grand final of GSTL". Both teams had tutored GSL champions but apart from NesTea and MVP, IM's line-up did not look as scary as oGs's, the latter hosting the best protoss in the world MC, the Genius Terran Nada and the incredible terran quartet of TOP, Supernova, Ensnare and Hyperdub. With such a disbalance of power, games of epic proportions were expected. Seed would have exactly none of that. The young protoss came out of freaking nowhere and won three games in a row, sending Hyperdub, TOP and Ensnare, all terrans that have taken part in at least six GSLs (Hyperdub, actually, has played in all of them), back to the bench. oGs had to call out MC to stop Seed's mad march towards an all-kill and if MC was not the PvP mastermind that he is, it would've probably ended bad for Old Generations. Even though Seed fell to the two-times champion (oh, well, no shame there), his 3-0 streak against one of the strongest teams in the world is definitely worth mentioning. 's achievement is not as impressive in my opinion but was hilarious as hell. Taeja is responsible for one of the three all-kills thus far in GSTL history and he did it... against his former team Zenex. I don't know if Cella suspected that Taeja would have little to no trouble going through Zero, Coca, Byun and Kyrix but even if he did, he was probably as surprised as I was. Oh, and Taeja also had one of the best victory celebrations of all GSTL when he came out and "fired" a paper gauss rifle at his team's bench. I still wonder why wouldn't he shoot, you know, the team but I guess all-killers possess certain peculiarities and like to have it their way. Sadly, has not been having consistently good results in the individual leagues recently. After the 2011 season of GSL started, Squirtle has been staying in Code A every single time and not being able to vault over the Ro16. He even failed to qualify for GSL July after he fell to Coca in the Ro32 of GSL May. Despite this, Squirtle had an impressive run in GSTL February. He gave a fiery start to the tournament by opening it with the first ever team-kill in the first game of the league. Although it was done against the then very bad terran line-up of fOu, the all-kill remains a feat to be commemorated. What is even more spectacular is Squirtle's game against none other than IM_MVP in the grand final of GSTL Febuary. Many people still consider it the best PvT (and possibly the best match overall) ever played in SC2, although the scene has seen A LOT for those four months that have passed. Our GosuGamers editor Soso even wrote a column, specifically dedicated to this match. What made Squirtle's play extraordinary is not only that he beat the king of Terran MVP in his own macro game, or that he tied the series 4-4 to bring it to the last, decisive set. It was about the way Squirtle did it, snatching the victory by using almost every single protoss unit and even outmacroing the "Game Genie Terran" on one of the largest SC2 maps ever created. Squirtle's display of elegance with the protoss race put an end to many discussions regarding PvT while firing up new debates over undiscovered aspects of the match-up, as well as proving that macro maps are the way to go in StarCraft 2. But whether you watch the game for the timings, openings and strategic insights or just for the pure show, you do not end up disappointed. They call him the prince of Zerg, NesTea's apprentice. Along those terms, is indeed like the Anakin Skywalker of StarCraft 2 but is cuter, has a piano and is better at video games. Also, at MLG he proved that even if his keyboard hand gets chopped off by a lightsaber, he could still go head-to-head with those rebellious foreigners. Going back to GSTL, Losira made his first appearance in February but his run was not as impressive as, say, Squirtle's. He did less than OK versus Zenex and attracted attention mainly due to his zergling /dance in his game against Bomber in IM vs ST. It was only in GSTL March when his talent would burst out as the young Zerg all-killed fOu with much ease and became the second person to score four in a row. Losira would later send IM to the grand final for the second time after prevailing over TSL_Trickster in the Ro4. It was by that time that most people would recognize Losira as one of the most innovative young players in Korea. The prince of Zerg brought some new, fragile and yet extremely efficient ZvP strats like mass banelings in mid-game combined with overlord drops. He would later refine and polish this style by including infestor timings to create one of the most potent army compositions in ZvP. Losira's story in GSTL ended with the March finals as his team would not qualify for GSTL May but Losira was already on the way to accomplish one of the most impressive runs of individual accomplishments. Just prior to the March team league, he came out as a Code A champion and then would earn a Code S spot, reach the Ro8 and later win a silver medal at MLG Columbus. Losira is someone that everyone should follow if only to catch up with this guy's amazing talent development. NO ONE knew who was before he made an appearance in last season's GSTL. But DRG is a true child of the team league: we haven't seen him anywhere outside of that yet** but when he steps in the booth it is a real treat for the Zerg fans out there (and StarCraft ones in general, too). DRG was unleashed as an ace sniper in MVP vs Prime in the Ro8. He would show up in the the decisive set to roflstomp over one of the most accomplished terrans in Korea - MarineKingPrime. But that would not be all the talented player had to show. DongRaeGu was sent as a last resort in MVP vs oGs in the Ro4, crushing through Nada, SuperNova and even team's ace, the God Protoss MC, the latter actually trying to intimidate DRG by slapping his booth window. In three sets, DRG delivered one of the most impossible and unbelievable comebacks in GSTL history thus far, sending his team of ultimate underdogs to meet SlayerS in the finals. Sadly, DongRaeGu could not repeat this incredible feat and won only a single set against Ryung and barely lost to MMA but when the latter received the "Most valuable player" award I was in a vocal protest. After all, MMA brought only three victories for Slayers and we already knew that he was a beast. DRG accomplished the impossible and carried his team to the silver medals, almost all by himself. Furthermore, he just slapped down the elite terrans of Slayers in the opening match of GSTL July to get his revenge! There are grand things ahead of this Zerg, believe you me. Who else, man, who else? You can write a ton about and still not cover all the amazing things he has done for SlayerS. He was known as Jjob by the time the first GSTL started and immediately became the hero of his team, almost pulling them back after a 0-3 start. However, Slayers fell to Zenex and MMA had to wait for the next month to make another stand. And what a stand it was. The ace of Slayers went through MC, July, Squirtle, Curious and MVP to put his team on the top and win the first ever "Most valuable player" award. MMA would perform incredibly once again in May, winning the final two sets vs fOu and stopping DongRaeGu's ZvT onslaught in the grand final. Once again, MMA carried Slayers to victory, winning a second "MVP" title, although, as mentioned above, it should have probably been awarded to the newcomer of the month! Although he started as a GSTLer, MMA's individual career is just as impressive. Most recently, MMA won the Columbus gold, proving that he has no trouble beating Koreans and foreigners alike, and finished second at the GSL Super tournament right below PoltPrime. And yet, somehow, MMA is still struggling in Code A but who knows - maybe the July seasons would bring him even more successes, both for Slayers and himself. as his opening, while MVP goes for quick banshees but sneaks a CC at the 12 o'clock location, a decision that would keep him alive for a long time throughout the game. A timing highlight comes at after starting two more gateways. Of course, HuK is forced to do so due to being denied any scouting and the fact that he had not seen MVP taking the natural by that time, usually a strong indicator of 1-base plays like cloak banshees. Indeed the first banshee of MVP comes around the 7th minute mark but HuK is already prepared - he has an observer out, despite it being a bit obsolete as his stalkers take a good care of the banshee just the same. Having killed the banshee and still seeing no expansion from MVP, HuK launches an immediate counter attack as soon as his immortal pops out. and the composition of HuK seems deadly scary. HuK starts to push in (denying the expansion along the way) and after several rounds of warp-ins he manages to climb the ramp and wither the economy of MVP. The terran defends by the skin of his teeth by pulling off SCVs and building marauders like crazy. Of course, his hidden expo proved to be a life-saver, still keeping MVP standing in this crazy race called "not mining less resources than my enemy". However, MVP is now down 28 SCVs to 44 probes of HuK - a scary situation to be in as terran, despite the mules and the third CC. HuK uses this big victory to start teching hard. and a Dark Shrine, but cancels the latter when it gets scouted. Instead, he adds two more stargates and starts +1 air armor and +1 shields, apparently gearing up to add strong air support to his ground army, both Void Rays and Phoenixes being an excellent choice at the time. MVP tries to equalize the scales with a big drop play, knowing that it would be lethally dangerous to assault HuK's front door. The drop occurres at 18:40 and HuK had to reveal his void rays, chasing the marauders of MVP away. The terran loses every single unit and once again HuK makes the decision to counter attack, splitting his forces by rallying the void rays into the main and pressuring the natural with his ground army. Somehow, MVP manages to defend, but for some reasons he still would not float a CC to the 3 o'clock expo, a decision that would put him behind in economy once again. Finding MVP a hard nut to break and already having good upgrades for his air units, and a minute later he finally scouts MVP's hidden CC as he prepares to take a fourth nexus. Moments later, the CC is chased away and the terran is in a very difficult position: the void rays of HuK are eating through the tanks and his ninja expansion is no more; MVP is down to only one mining base. The terran tries to expand to the gold while repositioning his 12 o'clock CC down at the 2 o'clock position. Instead of charging in straight away, HuK smartly waits for his carriers and high templars before attacking in and killing the gold planetary. Amidst all this hell, HuK sends some Zealots up to the 2 o'clock base of MVP and warps in a DT at the south expansion so he cannot reposition the orbital. Another DT is put at the 3 o'clock, further limiting MVP's expand options. With twice as few workers and only one mining expansion, MVP finds it impossible to battle HuK's high tier, heavily upgraded army with high templars, +3/+1/+3 carriers, chargelots and later - colossi. Knowing that the game is his to lose, HuK plays ever so patiently without any overcommitments and by winning the final engagement, the Canadian superhero puts an end to this epic 40-minute long game. Protoss opens 1-gate fast expansion; Terran sneaks a ninja expo while teching to banshees At 5:23 robo facility goes down, observer pops just as the banshee flies in at 7:20 The gateway/immortal rush by protoss begins at 9:45 14:00 - protoss begins teching heavily, going for third nexus, double stargate and multiple upgrades 18:40 - terran drops in the protoss main, counter attack follows as the drop is cleaned 21:00 - fleet beacon goes down 22:00 - the hidden terran expo is scouted and chased away 25:00 - the protoss moves in to kill terran's gold 30:00 - by that time both the 2 and 3 o'clock expos are denied by DTs 38:40 - final engagement Once again don't forget to share your thoughts in the comments on both this very replay as well as your wishes for the one to be featured next week. Help us find the most interesting game for you and we will feature it for greater justice! I am having the "hunch" that I, as a GosuGamers editor, haven't been paying the attention that team FXOpen actually deserves. After all, this is the first ever all-foreign army that has entered the GSTL with the intention to face the Korean maestros and defeat them at their home ground. Thus, their run should be followed closely, regardless the overall results. And that's the reason I am here now. With the beginning of GSTL Season 1, the FXOpen guys were placed in what someone might consider the easier group, although I am not sure if such term can exist when looking at the other teams and their setups. Yes, they wouldn't have to play the two-times champions SlayerS or the star-spangled roster of oGs (or TSL and Prime who each tutored recent champions), but there were other enemies to be feared, ST and IM among the more fearsome. FXO's run would not be at all easy. Sheth after scoring his first victory for FXOFXO's debut series was against StarTale - one of the leading pro teams in Korea and silver medalists from the first edition of the team league. Matches went head to head, the teams trading sets one for one, making the impression that the powers were most equal. QXC fell to the DT/Archon build of Tiger but Sheth was quick to avenge him by keeping his cool even under heavy double stargate pressure. After Sheth's fall to Curious, it was time for another player to prove himself. Oz came ahead and snatched a shaky victory out of ST's zerg, achieved despite his badly timed sentry pushes. Following Oz's victory, Squirtle stepped forward to crush the foreign resistance, DT-ing his protoss compatriot and then putting an end to Moonan with 1-base Void Ray. FXO finished 2-4 - a loss, but not an embarrassing one by any standards. To make such a stellar debut against the prestigious ST was a feat by itself. After rewatching the said series, a few things struck me regarding FXO's performance. First, their players seem to take extra damage from DTs. Second, it would appear that nerves played a bigger role than they should. Both QXC and Moonan seemed to choke when facing the protoss harass and died to stuff that a well-trained player would most likely not. However, the pressure is understandable - after all you are playing your first match in the GSTL and Squirtle is crushing your face with a Void Ray. Nonetheless - FXO would get more chances to prove their forte... "I would not indulge in guessing about what the hell happened to FXO on that particular Friday but a thought about them staffing a pay-rolled exorcist briefly crossed my mind."Sadly, a forte was not proven during the second week either. Instead, FXO faced a humiliating defeat, getting all-killed by the terran Hack - a player few would consider the strongest one on team Zenex. In his article, a colleague writer described the series as Hack just surviving FXO's suicidal tendencies, not really all-killing the foreigners as much as they all-killed themselves. One couldn't be more right - it was like a third party force had handicapped the entire line-up of FXO, pushing them into making all the wrong decisions, crippling their micro capabilities or taking hold of their sight altogether. As you might have guessed, week 2 was a short one for FXO. Moonan was the first to face Hack and after couple of okayish minutes of TvT, the FXO terran decided to run into tank fire and sacrifice all his marines, handing the victory on a silver platter. Slog took on the torch and once again a nice, fairly decent match was played until Hack dropped a nuke in the middle of an equal battle. Slog didn't see it and evaporated in seconds. Tgun and Oz did not perform any better. Instead of just playing normal, Tgun decided to do a blind rush to infestors, doing little to none scouting - something very, very important when your opponent is transitioning into double banshee. Oz, on the other hand, got defeated by poor control of his 3-gate/void ray build, losing flier faster than a lingerie model loses her virginity (no offense to any lingerie models reading this article). I would not indulge in guessing about what the hell happened to FXO on that particular Friday but a thought about them staffing a pay-rolled exorcist briefly crossed my mind. QXC achieves the only triumph in week 4. With style, though, as always!FXO's misfortunes carried on as GSTL went by. Their players continued to perform below their optimum level which both you and I know to be WAY higher. Thus, FXO scored two 1-4 losses, dropping down to the last place in group B but giving us some good plays nonetheless. Oz, and in part Tgun, were the only ones that defended FXO's honor in week 3. The Korean protoss snatched a victory out of team HoSeo by not choking at the sight of Seal's mass infestor build, which actually delivered quite serious doses of hurt before Oz could power up his army with multiple archons. His zerg teammate also made a nice stand (despite the fact that he got slapped by Jjakji, the terran that would eventually go 4-0 against FXO), playing an intense ZvT but once again facing defeat due to a problem previously discussed in this article - nerves due to lack of booth experience. QXC was the lonely hero of FXO in week 4, going through Gumiho in a perfect TvT with impeccable preigniter harass. The fOu terran took nearly 90 SCVs in casualties and left the booth probably wondering what the hell just happened and how hard it is to leave a few marauders at every mineral line (it was not like there were million bases to defend, Gumiho barely managed to take a third). Mr. Riley, though, was quick to fall to Choya in the next set (ah, those pesky DTs again, hm?) but I was already too impressed by his hellion control I barely noticed the final defeat for the day. "In less than 15 minutes QXC made MVP look like someone who regularly gets defeated in the first round of a weekly tournament." "I wish I had that many workers..."It would be the final game of FXO in this GSTL. By that time they were 0-4 in series, with no chance of jumping through the group stage. The community sites were burning with negative predictions, anticipations of an all-kill and one promise of a T-shirt being eaten. After all, the amazing Incredible Miracle were to be faced. QXC was the banner bearer for FXO, stepping first in the booth to face the IM elite. And the onslaught began. Perfect turtling, late game reapers, immaculate mech play - it took IM three sets to take QXC seriously before they would send someone who can actually games. There was no more room for fooling around with B-teamers - IM were on the brink of being all-killed and shamed before the eyes of thousands of fans. MVP stepped forth to put an end to this madness. With a terrifying calmness, QXC opened preigniter hellions into banshees and in less than 15 minutes he made MVP look like someone who regularly gets defeated in the first round of a weekly tournament. With pristine micro, QXC kept each hellion alive as long as possible which allowed him to execute devastating drops upon MVP's mineral lines and finish him with double banshee harass. MVP hesitated in GG-ing out even when his SCV count dropped to three. But, well, what can you do when your opponent has thrice the supply count? I wonder what happened to that T-shirt, though... Despite their contradictory overall results, FXOpen performed better than I actually expected. There are obvious flaws in the team but nothing incurable, to be honest. A few more televised matches, few months of hard Korean practice (now made easier with acquiring the entire fOu line-up) and polishing some aspects of their play and FXO would have little trouble performing seventeen times better. Even though they recently lost Sheth, that should not stop them from coming back and showing the Koreans their worth. Who, by the way, should esteem them way higher. Right, IM? This replay is a good example of tight mirroring build orders, ways to react to various threats and the power of +1 roach timing attack. With careful examination, one could see how different players choose to approach their mid-game tech of choice by doing slight reorders in the pattern so that they can get small or bigger advantages during different stages of the game, depending on their style or the way their opponents play. It is also a nice lesson of how to come back from a big disadvantage by using cool tricks, not yet extremely popular in modern highest-tier ZvZ. The players spawn at the top of the map with Idra on the left as the blue Zerg and Catz on the right as the red Zerg and . Catz and Idra mimic each other almost perfectly up to the point when the hatchery and pool get completed. True to his macro style, Idra goes for the immediate double queen, while Catz skips his second in favour of two pairs of lings, which will play the role of scouts. Idra sends a reconnaissance ling and as he sees the relatively high ling count of Catz, he puts down a baneling nest (around the 5-minute mark). Seconds later Catz does the same to keep the ultimate zerg mirror intact. Small ling/baneling battles break out but neither player suffers too serious damage and thus they both transition into the mid-game tech. Idra delays his own Lair just a bit in favour of a quicker warren and evo chamber. More importantly, however, he times his extractors a lot differently, taking the first just prior to the Lair, the second at 25% and the third at 50%, giving him a much fluent economy scale of the gas and mineral incomes. . Idra's tech pattern seems almost the same, but he chooses to swap burrow with overlord speed and has a +1 attack already on the way thanks to his faster evo chamber (Catz's own +1 would start much later when Idra's would be almost complete). but while Idra chooses to stay on the defensive, Catz moves out to put pressure, aiming to do two things - get an air of safety for his third and infestation pit to get up and in turn pressure Idra's expo. He forces a cancel but is quickly chased away by Idra's +1 roaches. Idra rebuilds his base and, seeing that he has the upgrade advantage, charges forth to Catz's third while, similarly, puts down his own infestation pit. After a moment of hesitation at the watch tower, Idra storms the enemy base just seconds before +1 attack is finished for Catz. Had the attack been delayed a bit more it might have looked differently but as it was, Idra got the better deal out of it, killing the hatchery of Catz and ending up with 17 more roaches. At the 16-minute mark, Idra moves out for a second time, heading once again towards Catz's third. However, Catz is quicker in throwing the fungal growths and catches a huge clump of roaches out of position, winning an early edge in the battle. Furthermore, he succeeds in fungaling Idra's infestors as well and as they fall, Catz empties the remaining energy to chase out Idra with infested terrans. But south of the battle lies the bigger victory for Catz - he has managed to get up his fourth base, while Idra's is just starting. The Peruvian, though, is even more sneaky that it is apparent. Despite him getting burrow early in the match, he doesn't reveal it at all, his infestor and roaches never seeing the underground of Tal'Darim Altar so they don't push Idra into throwing down the necessary defences. Thus, . 17 infested terrans spawn in few seconds, shredding the hatchery in no time, putting Idra immensely behind. As half of Idra's army is drawn back to clean up the infestation, Catz hits the forces left behind and a tense engagement begins. Both armies stay quite equal throughout the fight but with Catz one base ahead there is little hope left for Idra. As the larvae injects pop, Catz's supply leaps straight up to max and when Idra scouts the reinforcements with an overlord the game is over. Both zergs open 15 hatch into gas/pool ~ 5:00 - two baneling nests go up to defend possible ling aggression 7:00 - Catz goes for Lair -> Warren; Idra puts Warren and Evo first, then techs to Lair 8:33 - Catz researches burrow and roach movement as Lair finishes 13:23 - Idra destroys the third of Catz 16:00 - Idra moves out again; gets stopped by Catz and loses his earlier advantage 20:00 - Catz destroys Idra's fourth with infestors I hope you guys enjoy this week's edition of GosuGamers "Replay of the Week" feature. Stay tuned for more kick-ass replays and comment on our efforts, especially if you want to see something specific in the future issues. the up-and-down matches. They are an emanator of pure drama, an ultimate test and the loom that weaves the knit of changing generations. They are a mediator of utmost importance and every one - be they champions, newcomers, big stars or foreigners - must respect them as they can both shoot up and drag down players regardless of their abstract status. And in this early September, the up-and-down matches have taken the following form: GSL August Up-and-down Groups Group C Trickster Violet Taeja JYP MarineKing Also full with regular Code S-ers who I bet are not fancying their current position. Alicia, Supernova and Byun are among the strongest participants in this season's up-and-down matches. Ever since he took second at Code A January, Byun has been playing like a beast, even reaching top 4 last season. His TvT is inspiringly good and the TvZ is none too shabby either. The only problem for him might prove to be Alicia - SlayerS' PvT killing machine. Alicia's Code S performance has been a little shaky recently, going out in Ro32 two times in a row, but having in mind that his group is stacked up with terrans, there are high hopes for the Slayers protoss. As Supernova, this terran still needs to show some fine results so that I don't look like a fool when I try to convince people that he is actually good. Yoda is a guy that made his individual GSL debut two seasons ago and has been improving ever since. A top 8 spot in July shot him to the up-and-downs but, frankly, the pressure of competing among top Code S-ers might prove to be too much for Yoda. He might have the force within him but I suppose he still needs another season or two to finish his lightsaber. And then there is Leenock - the cute youngster that has been struggling for a Code S spot since the beginning of time. At the start of the year, Leenock was knocked down from the big stage and has been trying to overcome his Code A status three seasons in a row. Many still believe Leenock deserves nothing less of Code S, although I would disagree partially. Leenock been playing magnificently but fails to yet show a consistent improvement in his skill. Maybe if he gets Code S he will find the motivation needed to grow as a player skill-wise and, ironically, fate will meet him with three players that have been "up there" for quite some time now. This will be Leenock biggest test thus far. Considering the amount of star power injected into Group B, I could easily say that I have seen easier Code S/MLG pools. MC and Losira are one of the best players of their respective races in the whole world so I would presume they will roll back to Code S. The only one that can take a game of them is probably Kyrix, though this suspicion of mine might just lie on Kyrix's old fame. In fact, should winds change and Kyrix falls down, October will be the first Code S missing the Zenex zerg. I do not wish to express any disrespect to the other two contenders, but let's face it - it will take them slightly more than a miracle for their fairy tale to come true. Jjakji reached the up-and-downs by getting to top 8 over J and Lucky, who are significantly easier opponents than MC and Losira would be. And Check's mediocre performance in terms of results is still haunting him. It is not my intention to jinx him but as the stars aligned it would seem that there is a third Code A in a row ahead of Check. All in all, the biggest highlight in this group will be the Losira-MC revenge match, its origins way back at MLG Columbus. Moreover, having in mind that losing that greatly contributes to the possibility of dropping to Code A, the tension will be burning the studio chairs and possibly some caster vocal chords. Oh, and did I mention that this is actually the opening match too? Right off the bat we see MarineKing and Trickster - names that are still considered among the big ones but showing results in conflict of the grandeur ascribed to them. Trickster got top 8 in July but followed that with a disappointing play in both the next season and, most recently, MLG Raleigh. Like the Kyrix case, though, there has not been a single Code S run without Trickster in the line-up, although a nagging feeling inside tells me that October might just be the first. MarineKing - and his fans as well - are also on the edge of the chair. The terran that has seen four grand finals but won none will be fighting for his live once again. He was demolished in the last up-and-downs but, fortunately for him there, is only one terran now (although coming from the SlayerS school of TvT ownage). Also, placing second in the group guarantees a Code S spot so that should cheer MarineKing up at least a little. Of the other three, Violet and Taeja might have the better chances for qualifying. Violet's first appearance in GSL was further rewarded with a Code S graduation and although he is yet to pass the Ro32 barrier, I am always enjoying by the way he handles his race. What is worrying is that Violet has in his ZvT and if his future is to be determined by a match against Taeja that could spell doom for the MVP zerg. Taeja, on the other hand, has not had much success in the individual leagues but has been rocking GSTL like a boss. If he can transgress his GSTL super powers over to the up-and-down trials he will have the situation covered. This game is between two ultimate community favourites - TheLittleOne and Destiny - duking it out on Xel'Naga Caverns. In this tense 40-minute long game, the two enemies force themselves to play a really scrappy, low-econ game throughout almost the whole time. But despite the poor incomes, both Destiny and TLO find way to make their expensive army compositions work and constantly hunt each other's bases to keep the tempo unabating. TLO spawns north as the red terran while Destiny gets the south position as the yellow zerg. Both players open very standard with TLO going for a forward barracks into bunker rush, while Destiny gets his fast second hatchery but he gets his lings out fast enough to suffer no damage from TLO's pressure. Our terran player than falls back to transition into double factory and starts building a very flexible army. At the 10th minute mark comes the second timing attack from TLO, just as stim is finished and three tanks have been built to make this a scary push. However, the low-tech play of Destiny has given him the advantage of having a large enough army to deal with that easily and a zergling surround wipes the entirety of TLO's army along with the follow-up attempts for preigniter harass. As the game progresses, we see a tech difference in Destiny's play as compared to other more traditional zerg in their ZvT. Instead of going mutas in order to keep the terran at bay, Destiny puts down an infestation pit, followed by pathogenic glands and few infestors. Only then, at 12:20, does the spire get put down, timed perfectly with the initiation of a hive tech. As evolution completes, Destiny immediately begins morphing a greater spire, deciding to skip mutalisks altogether in favour of a faster brood lord tech, which, combined with the infestors he already had, would be a great trouble for the terran. Meanwhile, TLO himself had built quite the diverse army of tanks, thors, hellions, marines and even some banshees and thus moves south to take the gold, getting a strong position at the centre, making it possible to launch an attack at Destiny's third and at 17:50 it gets down under tank/marine/thor fire. Moments later TLO spots zerg's fourth at the centre left and at 21:40 it is cleaned up as well, putting Destiny in a very rough economic position. 10:00 - TLO's launches a stim/tank timing attack 12:20 - Destiny starts his tier 3 tech, times spire with hive 17:50 - TLO destroys Zerg's third... 21:42 - ...and his fourth as well 23:27 - TLO suffers a big defeat 26:14 - Destiny "infests" TLO's top left 40:55 - The GG from Destiny I hope you enjoy our pick for this week and that you will be just as excited with our second choice which will come shortly. Don't forget to speak up in the comments about everything that is ROTW, including replays you want to see, improvements, critics, etc. MC vs Losira @ Tal'Darim Altar HuK vs MVP @ Metalopolis Sickness vs VeraJaniceTooth @ Tal'Darim Altar Catz vs Idra @ Tal'Darim Altar Although not as long as our previous featured replays, this game brings to the table tight execution of cheesy build orders, know-hows of crysis management and predicting your opponent by just reading the possible future developments of the situation. Bly gives us a blueprint, a template of yet another way to punish greedy protosses and plays it out almost perfectly. WhiteRa, on the other hand, is there to be an example that there is no unwinnable situation and there are always cracks in every build order, every army composition and every containment. Bly and WhiteRa spawn as the red zerg at 6 and the blue protoss at 12, respectively, and as the early game goes on the way we see that this won't be your average ZvP. WhiteRa chooses to go for the very greedy 17 nexus, while Bly is approaching the game via the safest ZvP build order for his race - gas before pool. But the two things happen next that throw the early game stage in a sporadically observed state. Bly extends his deceit by even sending a "expo" drone down to his natural for the probe to see before he removes it with the first zerglings. As Bly's spine crawlers finish, they find juicy targets in the faces of the fresh nexus, the initial gateway and the forge. WhiteRa ends up losing all three of them but his answer to Bly's cheese is already on the way: at 7:00 he throws down double stargate while pylon-walling his ramp to keep the lings away. A quick glance at the production tab reveals, however, some more troubles for WhiteRa. Bly has read the situation perfectly and, either in expectation of the SG play or following Losira's guide of "How to break a protoss with style", puts down a hydra den. By the 20th minute mark, the game has reaches somewhat of a normal rhythm. WhiteRa is transitioning into colossi, while Bly is taking the gold as his third and adding infestors and banelings to his core of hydras - a composition all of us know is not the best when it comes to fighting protoss death ball. As soon as Bly spots what WhiteRa has been cooking the whole time, a roach warren and a spire are immediately put down but it is too late. Although he has managed to mix in some roaches in his army, Bly's composition is not at all tailored to stop WhiteRa's death ball. The zerg is pinned down at his natural and tries to make something happen with his last reinforcements and even manages to destroy the bulk of the gateway army but the colossi are still standing. As his natural hatchery falls, Bly gg's out... and says something else in Russian. Division 2 Ryung Dual Sight /// Ohana /// Daybreak Nony Dual Sight /// Antiga Shipyard Sjow Dual Sight /// Antiga Shipyard Darkforce Dual Sight /// Daybreak In a rather dull Week 4 for , BratOK is the only one that stood out as a deliverer of a damn funny play, if not too extraordinary. Despite winning just one map in the entire series, the Russian terran's daring lift off and transmigration of his entire base was hilarious enough to feel good for him and cause Puma enough confusion so that he loses the game. In the other matches of less interest, Stephano, Hwangsin and Zenio arrived with the tractors of stompage and raised Cloud, Haypro and Nightend to the ground. At the end of the night it was nothing if not baffling how the best ten minutes of W4D1 came at the hands of a division drop-out. The winners kept winning in . And while no one had even the slightest doubt that a Code S semi-finalist in the face of Hero would easily disintegrate a low-performing Sjow, it was DeMusliM who continued to attract all the attention. The Brit who often reaps mediocre results in every other tournament, faced and outplayed SlayerS' Ryung with the only map won for the Korean being after a banshee/hellion/marine all-in. When the final set on Daybreak developed into a proper TvT, Ryung could not do anything but die after losing every trade and every positional maneuver. And not too often do we see a SlayerS terran being outsmarted in such matter. To their luck, CrazyMoving and Dimaga got easy 2-0 wins against Nony and DarkForce, allowing them to keep afloat in the mid section of the division. For the German zerg in particular this meant the of his hopes for a higher placement as with a -7 points he's almost certain to finish last in Division 2. Division 3 Ganzi Ohana /// Dual Sight /// Belshir Beach Rain Ohana /// Antiga Shipyard /// Odyssey Mana Ohana /// Daybreak Strelok Ohana /// Shakuras Plateau Division 4 Select Tal'Darim Altar /// Shakuras Plateau Alive - Thorzain Tal'Darim Altar /// Antiga Shipyard /// Daybreak Cruncher Tal'Darim Altar /// Ohana saw underdogs bare teeth as TLO and Vibe jumped forth to bite two of division's leaders in Strelok and Ganzi. The German zerg used roaches to crush Strelok's main in game one and knocked him down with a critical speedling timing on Shakuras right before stim kicked in for the terran. In the other TvZ of the night, Ganzi tasted both Vibe's roach/bane bust and ultalisk/fungal compositions to go down 1-2, taking but a single map off of a luckily unscouted proxy rax in Vibe's main. SEn and Mana too played an interesting series, although it was mostly the Taiwanese that stole the applauds at the expense of Mana's life, dignity and protoss honour. A double roach/hydra drop bypassed Mana's colossus deathball to bring SEn the lead. The 1-0 score developed into a full-grown victory after an execution of the "If your opponents tries to be funny with DTs, just go f****ng kill him" principle in game two. The fun continued with as well with Alicia opening agaist Select in a series that will be later used in all those "late game protoss is OP" discussions and will help Flash decide if it is a good idea to switch races. Alicia was ruthless against Select and by the power of storms and colossi and archons, he put "laughter" into "slaughter" while dismembering the terran. The two zergs that played that night had something to teach their opponents, too. Ret's student was Cruncher--a protoss whose return to the scene has not been of the glorious ones--and he got to find out what a maxed out Ret does to a person. This included facing mass mutas that made him storm spine crawlers, his own army and empty ground, as well as being bashed down with the metaphorical boot of too many roaches. Yet if those results were expected to some degree, who would have thought that Division's Cinderella Lowely would continue to be undefeated. Although much can be argued about his methods, who would let an opportunity to punish a 1-rax/triple orbital with 12 pool banelings just slide like that? Division 5 Sheth Shakuras Plateau /// Dual Sight qxc Shakuras Plateau /// Odyssey WhiteRa Shakuras Plateau /// Ohana /// Daybreak Jinro --Morrow/WhiteRa and Sheth/Puzzle--were well below the treshold of quality entertainment and were nothing more than two straightforward series that deserve very little attention. In full contrast, however, QXC and Polt cooked an entertaining meal if only for the peculiar pleasure to watch QXC lift his barracks before stim was done and go the entire first set without it while still being head-to-head with the Korean. Of course, it would eventually be a loss for Complexity's terran but who in the whole wide world waits till the 20th minute mark to start the most important terran upgrade in the game? Also, props go to Targa for the bold and borderline reckless idea of going hydra/nydus build against hellions and tanks. As no people have actually succeeded in killing a rhino with a dandelion, Targa had to wash out his shame in set three where he took zerg's hive tech and stretched it to megalomanic proportions. Because when other zergs use roaches or banelings and lings as meet shield for brood lords, Targa forgoes these cheap-ass methods and goes for ultra/infestor. Casually. Division 1, Week 4 +7 +4 +2 0 0 -2 -2 -4 -6 The leaders are taking shape by the minute. Puma is already untouchable at +7 and with his unstreamed victory against Cloud (match will be recapped in later battle reports) Stephano is a close second at +4. In other words - everything develops according to predictions. Zenio continues to beat people and thus gets closer to the top with each passing week. Next week the Korean is playing TT1 in the match for the third place in the group and needless to say this is a vital step for both of them. The flying Russian is sinking deeper into division's quicksands he is not to be alone in there as Liquid`s Haypro is in no better shape. Winning the match against Hwangsin was paramount and falling 0-2 cut the strings of Haypro's hopes for good. Division 2, Week 4 +7 +5 +1 +1 +1 -2 -2 -4 -7 Comfort is what Hero and Demuslim are feeling after week four, leading the division with a whole lap before the trio of third places, not to mention that DeMuslim is a match short compared to HasuObs. Few things will change for the leaders after week five: Dimaga is not playing and Ryung is meeting Hasu, meaning that only one will get closer to the top two. In the lower part, Crazymoving and Nony are the only ones with a real possibility, although "real" might be somewhat of a stretch. The protoss still has to face both Hero and Demuslim and Crazymoving has EG's terran and Dimaga ahead of him. Division 3, Week 4 +3 +3 +1 0 0 -1 -1 -1 -4 This is so close that it burns my intestines. Eight of nine people in the division are within five points of each other and three of those eight are with a match less. The last part is more important for HuK than for anyone else. After a loss in week one, the Canadian superhero has been doing nothing but with NASL games and is in the very real position to claim the top spot by the end of the group stage cycle. Put together, Ganzi, TLO, Mana, Vibe and Axslav are the meaty middle part of the group. The American are dead even in matches played and points and the next week will be of utter importance. Vibe can breathe more easily knowing that his opponents is division's worst in Rain, but Axslav is facing Ganzi and you can never underestimate an ex-SlayerS terran. Ever. Division 4, Week 4 +5 +4 +1 +1 0 -1 -1 -3 -6 Three zergs and a terran are in a death race for the hot spots in division 4. And while this is another way of saying that nobody can play protoss outside of Korea and is the newly popular and common "thing" on the scene, how about speaking a word or two about Lowely. Before this season of NASL, Lowely was nobody. A Go4SC2 win here, a Zotac win there, etc., a classic example of the minor player. In NASL 2, he had but one real victory against WhiteRa (if we exclude the walkover vs Fenix, which we unquestionably must), thus remaining a player that was out of everybody's radar. Now, the Belarusian is undefeated in division 4 with DH champion Thorzain and group runner-up Ret among his victims. Every week, NASL viewers expect to tune in to see his fall but he never fails. Both Ret and Lowely, however, share a commong future in NASL as the arduos Idra/Alicia/Alive triathlon is ahead of them and that should proclaim the winner. Division 5, Week 4 +4 +5 +1 +2 0 -1 -3 -4 -6 As we mentioned, if anyone knows how to play protoss, it's the Koreans and division 5 confirms it. Although there aren't big points discrepancies as in divisions 1 and 2 and Morrow and Polt still technically have a chance, it's a fools hope for them and MC and Puzzle are likely to keep being where they are. For Puzzle, it's essential to win the direct match against MC in week 5 as if the SK player suffers defeat, it's a highway to top 1 for Puzzle, knowing that all that remain are Jinro, WhiteRa and Targa. Personally, I don't see Puzzle losing any more games in the group stages. Do you? Week 5 is soon over so just this time we will not engage in predictions but instead take a look of the matches that we'll be recapping shortly. Hwangsin Zenio Cloud Demuslim Ryung Sjow Vibe Ganzi Strelok Sen Alive Alicia Cruncher Puzzle Polt Targa Morrow As a leading player in eSports media, we cannot sit idly by and not get our hands on the latest updates on Major League Gaming; we simply owe it to our readers. To unravel what's in store for the next Spring Arena, Radoslav Filote undertake a journalistic quest to put cogs in place and tongue in cheek to discover what the MLG crew is cooking. Two is the prime number Here's a no-brainer: what has been MLG's top 2012 storyline so far? That's right! It's the recurring theme of MarineKing versus DongRaeGu - a story that is told, retold, and generally covered more times than a Depeche Mode song. It became MLG's golden bird, and while both fans and management might want a third finalist by the end of the year, sacrifices must be made for the sake of entertainment. Changes to MLG are coming, especially in light of the success of Spring Arena 1. We may or may not have insider information leading us to believe that the next Arena event will abandon their previous unnecessary preludes and feature MKP and DRG in a Bo17 grand final series! This is likely to come as a pleasant surprise for EG's HuK, who will now have to carry sandwiches for only two people, instead of the previous seven. But is this model feasible? Absolutely - it's simple, elegant and far easier to follow compared to what the folks at GSL are doing. Indeed, simplicity and compactness are the hallmarks of the new system. Why bother to follow stories that end at the quarter finals? Why waste time, barcraft money and precious popcorn when you can put them to good use watching a year's supply of ZvT. It's the very essence of Starcraft - we wouldn't make this up, would we? Now, we understand some fans may have reservations, and even a word or two, about the proposed changes, but we urge you to give MLG the chance to persuade you. The showmatch concept is just the tip of the iceberg, Titanic references notwithstanding. Extended series, welcome back! Rumor has it that MLG will be offering the so called "Spring Arena 2 Xtreme Editio". After the completion of the Bo17 series, a coin shall be tossed to determine, retroactively, if the winner came from an imaginary losers' bracket. If positive, it's extended series time! This is believed to be the next evolution in MLG's most beloved inclusion to the circuit. The extended series has captured the hearts of fans and players alike, leading them to make such statements as, "you can't always beat Koreans twice, but with the extended series, you don't have to worry." During a recent survey on its return, progamers were once again unanimous: "approve" is not the word. Perhaps the biggest deciding factor was an extensive study of Spring Arena 1: if the tournament proved anything it's that 30+ showmatches in three days is nowhere near enough. An almost non-fictional MLG employee disclosed that the format has already been stress-tested with real players. He said, and we quote: "You haven't seen the true beauty of the extended series until you've witnessed two players go at it for three days straight. It becomes a battle of wills. Once, the loser gg'd by flipping over the table." The winner was, naturally, MKP. All god's children can dance (maybe) According to our sources, there were initial misgivings about reducing the tournament format to the DRG/MKP dichotomy. Many were worried that other players would have to take a back seat while those who were actually good at Starcraft 2 showed off their skills. The creative minds at MLG, however, came up with a plan to assuage the fears of all the progamers who currently cannot hold a candle to either DRG or MKP. This exciting new idea, to be introduced this summer, is MLG's Code Meh, a league designed to emulate the hugely successful NASL. We quote: "We recognized that while NASL may not necessarily be the most popular league, its historical importance will eventually make it so it will be seen as a kind of Noah's Ark of Starcraft 2, a vessel which carries those players who would otherwise become extinct or be forced to climb up the ladder like so many amateurs. We decided we would build our model from that, partly as a homage to the genius of the original schema, partly to ensure that many MLG regulars wouldn't have to see the back door of our little tea party." "You don't have to try very hard to get into Code Meh," our source stated. "It's basically a system for easy buoyancy. We've run it by a couple of our North American players and they all love it. We'll also be giving out lavish cash prizes, and the winner will receive an MLG Gold Pass to watch DRG vs MKP in glorious HD resolution." Already there are reports of foreign teams assigning their non-Korean rosters to specialized Code Meh teams. Long gone are the days of training in Korea. A Parting of ways? The words above might lead you to believe that Code Meh will be nothing but an undisciplined mob of plebs being fed second-class bread, but we've been assured that the tournament actually will have strict rules of admission. The first of many cast-outs is StarTaleâ€™s Parting, whose amount of MLG exposure is still being debated, with pressure applied from many sides. One issue concerns Parting's ascension to LAN martyr as of last month's GSTL fiasco in Las Vegas. Becoming the new symbol of community dissatisfaction is making Parting's presence undesirable to MLG and Blizzard, who recently partnered up for the World Championship Series. "Next time he'd better think twice before disconnecting," commented a member of the MLG/Blizzard joint eSports committee. Parting may have moved dim-witted fans but the MLG/Blizzard regime is an entirely different matter MLG isn't the only party to want Parting far away from Spring Arena 2 and other events. On multiple occasions, both StarTale and GOM stated that Spring Arena 1 was downright disappointing and only stained Parting's immaculate PvT record. "If he loses a series, it better be a close 1v2 against Puma and MVP," said Parting's personal PvT manager, who later denied the statement out of shame. "I'll cast a spell on you." MLG also has another announcement in store: Casting Academy! Their spokesperson had this to say: "We recognized that our greatest strength lies in our casters so we decided to have more of them! Soon you'll be able to bathe in the sultry summer voices of up to a dozen expert casters, who will regale you with minutiae about their personal lives, shaving habits, and other things people love to hear about during Starcraft matches. You'll also be treated to the first MLG pedigree professional female caster, who will tell you all about the intricacies of life as a girl and may occasionally even describe the action on screen." But that's not all, MLG is also slated to enlist the services of the now world famous eSports dog, Chance, who will be filling in as a guest observer. We also approached the Dean of MLG's Casting Academy but he declined any further comment. His reluctance to disclose more information about Spring Arena 2 leads us to believe that this is not the last batch of surprises we'll be seeing. Rest assured, when they come along, we'll be there with an eager pen and a critical eye. Division 1 Cloud Shattered Temple /// Antiga Shipyard Stephano Shattered Temple /// Daybreak Hwangsin Shattered Temple /// Tal'Darim Altar /// Shakuras Plateau Haypro better stuff"; qxc and Sheth abuse Ohana to the maximum and never engage each other but instead lay constant sieges on the thirds and fourths; Jinro brings us back to the early days of SC2 and uses mech against Puzzle; and Morrow and Targa play the best game of the season thus far, fighing for nearly 50 minutes on Daybreak before Morrow's bio manages to shoot Targa dead. If only all other matches were half as good as Division 5's, this would've been a week to remember for NASL. Division 1, Week 6 +11 +2 +3 +2 0 0 -2 -8 -8 Boy, is Puma untouchable! If BratOK did not do that wacky base floating stuff in week 4, the Korean would be at perfect +12 points but I guess +11 is also satisfactory. The constant pickering at the lower leves of the division and constant redistribution of power has left the group without a certain or at least stable runner-up. Stephano, who was in the top three since the beginning of the tournament is now forth with +2 points behind Zenio and, what is more suprisingly, TT1. The Canadian is second and although this division is all about the day-by-day changes in standings, this is a big feat for him. If he was not to play Puma still, I'd say there was a real chance to solidify that top two. We can also include Cloud and NightEnd in the equation but knowing that Cloud is playing Zenio next and NightEnd has to go true Stephano and Puma, I'd say it's already lights out for these boys. They desperately needed a strong early-season push and as such was non-existant their hopes should not be too high. Division 2, Week 6 +11 +7 +2 +2 0 -4 -5 -6 -8 Ah, what an exemplary Division this one is. There is a clear winner, a clear runner-up and strongly expressed middle and bottom parts. It makes you realize how there's nothing more to say about it as everything has already been written in the previous weeks. The only thing out of the ordinary is Demuslim's four matches only. The Brit did not play the game against Nony last week and now has a TvP triathlon ahead: Nony, Hero and HasuObs. Having to practice one match-up only for so many days is definitely a bonus to DeMuslim and he might not even lose his magical presence at the highest layers of the NASL. It's also curious to see how Dimaga's prediction of a Hero/Ryung/Crazymoving top three is now fully shattered. Division 3, Week 6 +4 +4 +3 +2 -2 -2 -3 -3 -5 Slowly and steadily over the course of several weeks Division 4 found this top four - one with parts intimely close to each other. HuK, Strelok, Ganzi and Sen are all within a 2-point difference and the next couple of weeks are critical. The lead of the first two is not big at all and even players in the negative like Vibe and TLO have a chance to catch the last train to the playoffs. Lights are out for Axslav, however. The protoss that gave us not one or two inspiring plays during the season is most likely not going to make the cut. -5 points and 1-4 is scores is just too much to overcome. The same goes for Rain, too, but the Fnatic terran has been under the radar in general so this was to be expected. Division 4, Week 6 +6 +3 +3 +2 +1 0 -1 -6 -9 They thought (and we thought) Lowely could not do it. They (and we) were wrong. The Belarusian version of Demuslim, although resting this week, is safely on the top of the division and has no intention of stepping down. However, Alicia and Select are kind of close to him and if Lowely runs out of luck, or skill, or mojo, the Koreans might catch up to him. The division is also a complete reverse to what people generally expected. DreamHack and IPL champions Thorzain and Alive are stuck in the middle or below and so are the two zergs that used to be the go-to guys when a tournament needed winning. Here, Ret and Idra are not doing too well with the first often falling victim to his trademark overdroning and the second being suffocated by his own indifference to the game, garnished with the usual frustration. Division 5, Week 6 +8 +4 +4 0 -1 -1 -2 -7 -5 This is much like Division 2 but instead of a clearly outlined duo, we have a clearly outlied trio. It's no wonder seeing MC and Puzzle that high but it certainly is for Morrow. The Infested Terran is not particularly known for his outstanding recent results but here in NASL he stands atop Polt and Sheth like nobody's business. Although he might not catch up to Puzzle and secure top 1, short of MC there is nobody else to threaten him: Polt is at -1 points and so is Sheth and qxc, WhiteRa and Jinro are to no one's surprise in the deeper negative. Morrow needs to beat Sheth next week as a decisive match against MC will be next in week 9! Nightend Haypro Hwangsin Hero Nony Crazymoving Vibe Huk Rain Mana Thorzain Idra Alive Sheth qxc Polt WhiteRa At 1:30 a.m. the three of them log in and begin Act I – the first mile on the long interstate to level 60 and the mysterious Inferno difficulty. And this is the first chapter of my travel notes. and nothing has changed. The first 30 minutes till the Skeleton King are as good and as boring as they were a month ago which only irritates me more as we enter the next area. I’ve always hated the brownish-yellowy exteriors and the Fields of Misery are a bit of a design let down, speaking strictly personally. However, it is where we actually face our first near-death and real-death experiences while bashing walker trees like bosses and dying unsuspecting to the poison. We continue on our way, beat the spider queen as the second act boss (a fight very similar to the SK encounter – beat the bitch, beat her adds, beat her some more), cross the drowned temple, the jail, the highlands (all leaving a so-so feeling in me, despite being hyped beyond high heavens and feasting on every pixel). At the end of Act I we reach Leoric’s Manor and begin our descent through the Halls of Agony – the best designed interior and area in general of Act I. Fire traps, giant cleavers, zombies walking out of burning furnaces, the color of blood and charred walls are all over the place and we search for the Butcher in exultation. As every other boss in this game (on every difficulty!) the Butcher is a piece of cake but is the first thing we encounter with actual fight mechanics and we find ourselves kiting the bastard while resurrecting our dead wizard. We one-shot the Butcher, watch the burial of Deckard Cain and take the caravan to Act II and Lut Gholein… pardon… Caldeum. Used to charging in and delivering vengeance to hordes of enemies, we are being diligently and painfully explained that this cannot and will not go on forever. “Watch out, wasps!” and “F**k those wasps!!” are commonly heard phrases around the room. Eventually, thanks to our long forgotten gamer’s pasts and now tuned down stupidity, we reduce every Act II fight to the simplicity of the Act I ones. Ultimately, this leaves us free to marvel at the truly stunning art design of Act II. I’ve always enjoyed Lut Gholein and its surroundings in Diablo 2 and since D3 Act II has identical feeling, it couldn’t have been otherwise. The Archives of Zoltun Kulle and the Dahlgur Oasis are the jewels of this part of the game, which, by the way, took us the longest time to beat on every difficulty. The Maghda and Zoltun Kulle encounters are as straightforward as it gets, once again built on the beat adds -> beat boss mechanics. Not until Belial am I truly satisfied from a boss fight, although looking retrospectively to those first hours of gameplay it might’ve been a different case then. I now realize that all the excitement was from seeing new stuff, one-shotting a boss (as if it was a real challenge...) and possibly getting an achievement should the buggy system allow it. Belial, however, was a whole different matter and I still consider him the best final act boss in the whole game. What starts as a tedious, “not again” adds plus boss encounter takes a 180 turn as Belial enters his third phase. The battle gets a strong arcade/console feeling as we run around trying to dodge the green circles that mean our death. Although haters will not avert from hating and say that Diablo should not feature any elements from God of War and the likes, we have a genuine . And there’s real satisfaction as we beat him and not just of the “oh, we beat him” type. as the acts themselves have grown shorter compared to the previous two. In Act III we were introduced to the Heralds of Pestilence and Act IV had the Morlu Incinerators – which together with the Act II wasps comprise my top three of the absolute most dreadful mobs in the entire game (although they will become a problem from nightmare on). In terms of final boss fights, both Azmodan and Diablo are insultingly easy. Everyone that is not a cloth user can facetank Azmodan at this point and Diablo was nothing more an endurance fight with all his three phases and hell of a lot HP. Also, game designers should stop making characters fight their own shadows for good. We look at the played time: 14 hours and some minutes, including the /afk time for making coffee and relaxingly staring at something that is not an isometric demon. As we draw the final line, it’s time to pass the heavy judgment, the answer to the first sentence in the article: Is Diablo III worth it? Several highlights need to be examined before we strike the hammer. By the end of Act IV, you'll be level 30+ with all active skills unlocked and since this is normal and you will never ever die if a smidge of attention is paid, it means this is your opportunity to go wild. Test everything. Construct the foundations of any build you wanted to try out. Many runes and passives will still be unavailable at that point but the majority of them will become handy when you start designing Hell and Inferno builds anyway. Cast that blizzard, whirlwind through stuff, use a giant bell to blast enemies, play a witch doctor without pets and throw bombs and arrows around. Normal difficulty is giving you the to find the playstyle that suits you. You will have all Hell and Inferno to perfect it out! Priceless is the feeling of thinking “I wonder what this mob does” right before you are brought to zero HP in seconds. It’s certainly the main reason why playing hardcore from day one is more reckless than charging naked through a horde of giant hedgehogs. The action is seamless, never interrupted with the old, irritating town portal heals from Diablo 2. You finish a mob, health globe your life back and proceed to the next pack. In one or two years, this game will probably get banned from Australia on charges of causing incurable addictions. It’s ruddy beautiful! And the graphics design is fine, you old grousers. The pieces of lore come in forms that do not disrupt the dynamics of the game. Since the Diablo franchise is known for his deep, complex and still not fully explored lore (as compared to the main game story arches which are nothing special at best), these short voiced-over excerpts are manna from heaven for the lore freaks. Additionally, every significant companion has more than a few stories to tell and I suggest you hear them out. Redditors are already speculating on the origins of certain characters. The so passionately advertised is, in fact, wrapped up in a very controlling, tempering package. Every open-air level is always the same so if you wipe or need to restart, you’ll know precisely where to go. Even interior levels have patterns of randomization and after playing through an area a couple of times you will know with a devilish certainty if there’s an exit at the end of the corridor or not. In addition to the former, there's a strong feeling of linearity in the game. The characters hop from quest to quest in an exact order and combined with the limited randomization this becomes a real problem in late nightmare/hell - bottom line it's the exact same game, only harder. Many bosses and areas are close to what we saw in Diablo 2. If those were one or two isolated incidents maybe I could’ve let it slide but as it is, there is no point denying what is blatantly there. Comparing D3 to D2 in short: Act 1 is Act 1. Act 2 is Act 2. Act 3 is Act 5. And Act 4 is reversed Act 4. Let me go into more detail: » The Tristram cathedral is now officially the most popular tourist destination in all Sanctuary. » It’s not too big a difference whether it’s the Lut Gholein desert and the Lut Gholein tombs or the Caldeum desert and Caldeum tombs. It’s still orange and covered in sand. » Belial and Duriel fights are strikingly similar in the sense of that there’s not much space to run around and staying on one place for more than two seconds means death. » Diablo III Act III has the player defending a mountain fortress by destroying an organized demon army with war machines as well as their powerful overlord. He himself looks like this: If you are wondering why this looks familiar, let me refresh your memory: Yeah. » Instead of going to the burning hells for a short, boss-heavy Act IV, you visit the high heavens for a short, boss-heavy Act IV. The final cinematic is, for a lack of a better word, garbage. With the patriotic music on the background and Tyrael’s cheesy speech, the only thing missing was the American flag pinned atop the Crystal Arch. The obvious flaws aside, the game is still amazing and worth every minute and every cent. It's addictive, it's challenging, it's rich on both enemies and character builds. Buy it, play it, enjoy it, talk about it. It's what I am going to do for a long time. Expect the next chapters of this feature within the next two weeks. In them, we put the first impressions aside and focus strictly on gameplay and gameplay related issues as well as both the outstanding and questionable design decisions. How does the gaming experience change from normal to nightmare? How problematic is the aforementioned “controlled randomization”? How does Hell force you into builds? In what ways is Inferno broken, is there a real end-game in Diablo 3 and several ways to improve it. Stay tuned! Modern ZvP stories are not like that. Sure, they are often long and mothership is often involved but how often do they go to the 50th minute with few to none head-to-head confrontations? Some may call that "boring" but I'd rather refer to that as "perfection". In those long minutes on Cloud Kingdom, Mentalist was nearly flawless: he moved with a cat-like gracefulness, smartly avoiding the unnecessary macho PvZ army trades. After all, he knows that this is StarCraft 2 and the female audience is thin to say the least, making public displays of raw strength quite irrelevant. The game began with Golden swiftly infesting lots of bases and spining up the whole central high-ground, building up a static and reliable defense for his third and fourth. To Mentalist's luck, Cloud Kingodm is a map of many roundabout pathways and when a mothership hits the field at the 17th minute mark, the protoss makes an advancement towards Golden's fifth. He takes it down but as he loses his mothership to a corruptor snipe and as Golden moves half his spine crawlers to completely shut down the central position, his army gets trapped behind enemy lines. Fortunately for him, Golden has no intention of hunting it down and instead makes a move towards the protoss fourth, which opens enough room for Mentalist to act. While the zerg is busy cleaning up in the centre, blink stalkers run around and erase two of Golden's bases, his hive tech included. More blink attacks are launched. The powerful but slow brood lord/infestor army cannot keep up and Golden loses another base and also his vertebrae of static defenses in the middle. The zerg holds to dear life but another uncalculated attack from him springs another blink stalker trap and he is forced to relocate once again. By that time, Mentalist has also mined his share of the map but gateway units are easy to resupply. Brood Lords aren't. With no economy, Golden has to tap out after 47 minutes of being juggled around like skittles. Although not as grand as the one above, this second game got picked if only for the contrast it creates put next to its semi-final cousin. Seeing how Mentalist took the passive robo/expansion opening and geared for that 15-minute mothership and then being razed to the ground in seconds with a perfectly timed out baneling carpetting made me sincerely laugh in delight. Don't judge me, please! Will TSL ever stop winning GGA Cup events? is a well placed question. In one month time, three Team SCV Life players ravaged through their grand final opponents, finishing with an aggregate score of 8-1 in GF series. Hard to believe that this was a team that in the beginning of the year was left with hardly any ace players and was in the middle of a major restructuring that was not going all too well. The first GGA Cup victor that was crowned was Revival. The zerg grabbed the gold with a 3-0 over his team-mate Inori in a series quite mercilessly. With Revival now among the grand final players and out of the qualifier process, on April 19th, the GGA Cup #1 runner-up Inori caught up with a 3-1 against Bischu in a tournament that was a genuine pleasure to watch and a pantheon of old and dusty but cool strats. And finally, GGA Cup #3 put the end of the NA Qualifier stage and completed TSL's flawless hattrick as Hyun prevailed over Mentalist. Although on June 6th the GGA Cup transfers over to the European server and there will surely be a fresh change of sign-ups, there are still a few stories that might not have yet seen their end. We begin by going back to the start of this clause and TSL's dominant utopia. So far, we've seen only Inori, Revival and Hyun unleashed and they were amazing but TSL still has their heavy hitters Polt and Symbol. Was that NA hattrick but a prelude to a further invasion of theirs? The European server is considered a much more difficult than the North American one and if TSL want to keep winning grand final spots, they will surely have to call for the players that have made names of themselves on the grandest of stages. Just take a look at the GGA Grand Final line-up and imagine it with Polt or Symbol (or better yet both) in it. If Symbol versus Heart is one MLG revenge match I would die to see, how about Polt against Thorzain? Yes, we are all more or less obligated to cheer for TSL to send more players this way! Second, we have the most unfortunate ZeNEXMentalist who was eliminated by TSL players in both GGA Cup #1 and GGA Cup #2. Relatively unknown to the wide public, this talented Korean protoss has always given his best in GGA games and especially in the last tournament where he easily stole the attention away from the eventual champion by playing that 50-minute game against Golden we talked about earlier. I'd certainly want to see more of Mentalist in the EU qualifiers, optimally pitted agains the European elite. And last but not least, going over to the EU servers meaning the European crowd finally seeing the faces they know and love. The North American ladder has always been somewhat of an uncharted territory but we all are all familiar about who rules the European one. Many of the familiar names such as Thorzain, Mana, Dimaga and WhiteRa are already invited but heavy hitters such as Kas, Happy, Nerchio, Feast, BlinG and Stephano (just a small part of the top 25 of EU Grand Master) are still out in the open. Up to them is to disrupt the Korean homogeny of the GGA Qualifiers. Having GGA tournaments on the European server should be a great news for the bigger part of our community! The four EU Qualifiers will span over a month and a half, starting on June 6th with GGA Cup #4. The tournaments will begin at 19:00 CET, meaning that if you sign up you'll be able to come home from school or work, play some games, get a shot at meeting the best in the business and still finish in time to catch the Heart of the Swarm weekend in Anaheim! Don't let the Koreans take all the glory! Before the actual game design talk commences, Blizzard give us some figures about the first two weeks of Diablo III: On average players have created 3 characters each 80% of characters are between levels 1 and 30 1.9% of characters have unlocked Inferno difficulty 54% of Hardcore players chose a female character The majority of Hardcore deaths (35%) occur in Act I Normal The most common level 60 build in the game is only used by 0.7% of level 60 characters of that class (not including Passive diversity) The most used runes for each class at level 60 are Barbarian: Best Served Cold, Demon Hunter: Lingering Fog, Wizard: Mirror Skin, Monk: Peaceful Repose, Witch Doctor: Numbing Dart It's interesting to decipher some of those numbers, particularly the large amount of Hardcore deaths on Act I Normal. Having played through Act I Normal about five times now (including on hardcore), this writer can guarantee that there are no special mobs that are particularly dangerous besides the Walker Trees in the Fields of Misery. It's not like Tristram and its surroundings are cluttered with Colossal Gorgors or Heralds of Pestilence, so our guess is that most of the people fall victim to the illusionary sense of immortality which can make a person play over-recklessly. Sadly, there is no statistics on which classes die the most on Act I Normal. More surprising is the low percent of characters who managed to unlock beat Diablo on Hell and unlock Inferno. Have in mind that with an average of 3 characters per account, 1.9% is actually the absolute highest amount of that have unlocked Inferno, while in fact this number should be lower, knowing that many players have multiple characters on Inferno. Considering how easy it actually is to beat Hell (not to boast around, just shooting a statement that holds true even when considering the more casual players), I expected it to be above the 10%. I'd love to see statistics of some actual Inferno progress (e.g. number of characters that have beaten Act II) as it communicate some even cooler information! The third detail of interest is the figure 0.7% used to describe the most used build for each class. Although this may look like something in full support for Blizzard's intent to have great build variety, we need to take some factors into account. First, not all level 60 characters have unlocked Inferno, and we can tell you that Hell builds have really nothing in common with Inferno builds. Second, changing one rune on one skill does not make for an or both to make up for it and this is also something that leads to the small percentage that we have here. Inferno build stats will make for a more interesting discussion but 114,000 people are not a representative sample size, I guess. On to game changes now. A part of Blizzard's post is related to the recent Patch 1.0.2. Patch Notes. The patch saw Monk's Mantra of Healing and its rune Boon of Protection redone. Previously, after casting MoH made the classes using them very hard to kill with proper itemization, even on Inferno. Although the changes to Force Armor and Lingering Fog persisted, the Mantra of Healing was changed once again (details available in the patch notes at the link above). Blizzard's explanation is as follows: Regarding the changes to Lingering Fog, Boon of Protection, and Force Armor: we determined these skills were simply more powerful than they should be, and we felt their impact on class balance and how each class was perceived warranted hotfixes as soon as we were able. However, we don't want you to be worried that a hotfix nerf is lurking around the corner every day. If a skill is strong, but isn't really breaking the game, we want you to have your fun. Part of the enjoyment of Diablo is finding those super-strong builds, and we want players to be excited to use something they discovered that feels overpowered. A good example of this is the monk Overawe rune, which many players have identified as being quite good. We agree it's good, but we don't think it's so far out of line that we're going to swoop in and hotfix it out of existence. Inferno is intended to be extremely difficult, but with some specific skills, a few classes were simply able to progress far more easily than intended. This made the classes, which were about where they were supposed to be, seem very underpowered. It also created the perception that the classes doing well were intended to rely on specific runes in all their builds, and the other classes were just broken. This is the opposite of what’s true. If any single skill or rune feels absolutely required to progress, it means that skill is working against our goal of encouraging build diversity -- and those “required” skills need to be corrected. We know these hotfixes snuck up on people, and it took us a day or so to communicate that they had gone live. However, our intent moving forward is that when there are circumstances where a hotfix is necessary, we’ll communicate changes that could impact your ability to play your class through ‘Upcoming Changes’ posts in the General forum. Ideally, we’ll let you know as soon as we even have the idea that we want to make that kind of change. Talking about Inferno, this is one of the places that the development team will be focusing a lot. The first changes will come with Patch 1.0.3. which is to correct the damage "spikiness" in Inferno, often resulting in characters being one-shotted without any ability to react. As this is in direct to contradiction to the intended "very consistent drain on your health", this will be fixed. And that makes perfect sense. The current state of Inferno is that either you get killed in one blow with zero chance to object to the finality of the vortex into instant death arcane laser field; or you are geared enough to tractor through the elites with the fights that are actually challenging and force you to calculate your cooldowns and optimize your rotation being a very rare sight. The gap between the two extremes is just too large at some points and balancing the elite pack fights might be the hardest job for the development team on the list. Furthermore, Blizzard are tuning Inferno to be beatable by a variety of offensive builds, as they feel that building full defense is not that fun. I will have to agree with them there - kiting an elite pack and running around the map like a scared little girl while waiting for my defensive cooldowns is not the most exciting experience. We've also seen some people saying our intention with Inferno is just one-shot you to make it difficult. While damage is a bit spikier than we'd like, we're actually seeing a pretty significant number of people attempting Inferno without sufficient gear. There's a good chance that returning to the previous Act to farm upgrades will do the most to help you survive. That said, we’d like to shift some of the focus away from survival and more toward using a variety of offensive tactics to succeed. Survival will still be important, but finding ways to maximize your damage while staying alive is more exciting. We’re not particularly concerned with whether or not a boss is “beatable,” though it should feel epic and challenging to defeat it. We’re more concerned with ensuring that acquiring 5 stacks of Nephalem Valor and taking on as many Champions and Rares as you can remains the most challenging and rewarding way to play. Final game changes include tuning the power of items and adjusting leveling costs for the artisans. The former is addressed by correcting the item level of the gear so that players can get a good explanation about why a blue item of level 63 is better than a level 60 legendary. Legendary items will also be buffed with the PvP patch, although this will not be done retrospectively, meaning that current legendaries will not be affected, only post-PvP ones. This leaves a feeling that the D3 community might not be entirely satisfied by the fact that there will still be crappy legendaries but there's no evidence that the overall idea behind the item design will change any time soon. And it shouldn't really. When every barbarian out there carries an Azurewrath with a Stormshield, it leads to point where there's little to no diversity and characters that are indistinguishable from each other. And this is what Blizzard say about the crafting system: Other areas of concern have been both the gem combination system and Blacksmith leveling and crafting costs. The intent, especially with the Blacksmith, is that he’s leveling with you, you’re able to use him as an alternate source for upgrades. Our design goal is that once you get to level 60, his recipes are actually good enough to help fill a character’s potential itemization gaps. To correct these issues, we’re looking to adjust the Blacksmith costs for training (gold and pages) and crafting from levels 1-59, and reduce the cost of combining gems so that it only requires two gems instead of three (up to Flawless Square). Both of these changes are scheduled for patch 1.0.3. Although leveling costs were certainly one of the many things that the community desired, there's also the moment about the complete randomization of crafting in terms of random properties. Members of the community boards have been asking about the option to pay gold to limit this randomization (by choosing one of the properties, for example, or changing them post-crafting) and it will be curious to see if Blizzard will consider to address these in the future. Battle.net So Normal is done. “What’s next?” doesn’t even register as a question in my head as I immediately pick Diablo’s loot and start all over on Nightmare. I know every mob, every area, every quest, every trick in the book. My build is flawless, the double axes of my barbarian spin in a whirlwind of crimson death and there hasn’t been any enemy that could oppose me and my cloth-using entourage of a wizard and a witch doctor. Or so I think. Act I is there to endorse my delusions. In under two and a half hours the Butcher is dead, drops its crappy blue loot and I take the caravan to Act II. It’s elementary with one exception: in the catacombs between Leoric’s manor me and my party encounter the first elite pack that we virtually cannot kill. A shielding/vampiric skeleton waves the middle finger in our DPSs and so, the brave adventurers that we are, we run around the motherf****r and let him live. A mercy he did not deserve. As we progress further into Nightmare, the way we look at the game gradually changes. Having beaten this difficulty with more than just one hero now, I can testify that this was not some kind of bad luck on gear or a reckless play or being treated to surprising combinations of monster affixes. No, it really did get harder, although not as quickly as I wished it. Somewhere in late Act II or early Act III I am forced to start thinking differently in terms of what kind of gear I want on. The glass cannon approach to the game starts withering in effectiveness and although it does not disappear completely till late Hell or early Inferno (depending on gear or group setup) it certainly doesn’t make my job easier. As armor and especially resistances are hard attributes to stack, balancing vitality and the primary damage attribute became the most important task. Defensive skills also make their way to our builds: the Wizard picks Diamond Skin, the Witch Doctor starts using Spirit Walk, Leap or Furious Charge sneak into Barbarian’s style of play. Speaking from the experience of a player who is regularly playing on Inferno, all this is the well-polished, ornate front-door that is one’s first stop on the path to the madness that is the last difficulty. Take it from the grinder: Learn to use your defensive skills as early as possible and get used to the fact that you will not be able to one-hit stuff forever. In Act III, I abandon my Stomp/Overpower/Whirlwind build as it was hard and dangerous to utilize at times. I find that implementing Revenge and War Cry was much more beneficial and getting used to using those skills now pays back in Inferno. Near the end of Act III, we discover that it’s wise to start considering stacking Magic Find on top of Vitality and the damage attribute. Sacrificing MF for defense/damage is also an option, certainly, but we found it undesirable for the sheer reason that 90% of the items that will carry a player to Act II Inferno are actually picked up in Hell: the 51-60 ilvl range has incredibly good loot! Also, swapping battle gear with MF gear just before the Inferno elite dies is a common practice and the more MF gear one acquires in Hell (done through other MF gear), the better. Put in short, our approach in terms of itemization by the end of Nightmare was: Normal: Stack as much damage as possible. We never die so might as well drill through the content the quickest Act I and Act II Nightmare: Start stacking Vitality in addition to damage. There are nasty mobs all over the place and we want to survive the first few blows Act III and Act IV Nightmare: Stack Magic Find as best as we can. Yet, we try not to keep bad gear on just because it has 4% MF. Staying alive is still more important than MF percentages. Hell itemization will be covered in the next feature but overall it’s the time when gearing for armor and resistances becomes essential. Late Nightmare is also the time when elite packs start to become a small problem. In Normal and Act I-II Nightmare, they are just a source of more and better loot, but they gradually turn into a threat that needs to be considered. The average cruise through the Nightmare content teaches me to fear the following affixes: . Any combination of two will be the toughest opponent in Nightmare, especially in narrow, interior areas. How did we beat them? Vortex: We keep our emergency escape button ready. Jumping in a pack of Vortex monster is the very definition of wasting cooldowns and resources as they pull us in anyway, usually into something lethal. We keep those Teleports and Furious Charges up. Molten: The Molten mobs are tricky and they require a little bit more than straight on face-beating. After dying several times, we learn to predict the way they move and stay . Better take a punch to the face then trailing behind the mob and dying to fire. Arcane Enchanted: Everybody hates AE mobs and by the time we are deep into Hell we understand know why. The lasers do massive damage and it’s almost certain death if they pass through you. Fortunately, they spin slowly so we can maneuver around them but not when you are vortexed/jailed/frozen, though. Being around those combinations becomes my second nature. Overall, once we learned how to approach nightmare encounters we were fine throughout most of the game. Unusually high frequency of death cases was detected in the Archives of Zoltun Kulle and the Crystal Spire areas just before Diablo. We draw the line between Nightmare and Hell at level 51 and start weighing the pluses and minuses of the experience. The gradual increase in difficulty has the perfect tempo. Often after dying we wonder “Imagine what Inferno is like…” and this keeps the excitement high. If there are Nightmare battles that are too hard to handle, how often will I have to revive at last checkpoint once I am in the end game? As there are currently severe problems with Inferno (to be discussed in later articles), late Nightmare together with all Hell are the most interesting and genuinely pleasant stages of the game. We die but not too often and we’re always given a fighting chance. The number of affixes on a monster limits the combinations that can disintegrate you in one blow and make the fight a kiting fest to essentially zero. As every active skill in the game is unlocked, it’s all runes and passives from now on. This confirmed my initial concerns that there will be a couple of level ups that mean literally squat to you. A single rune is not likely to have you change your entire build and the passives with such power are rare. Bosses stop dropping good loot and the first time we kill a Nightmare act boss to get a few blues brings out a sincere surprise. We knew that boss’ loots are tuned after the first kill on them in order to prevent boss runs, but all until that time I presumed it meant “first kill on every difficulty”. After playing that game for over a hundred hours, I still consider it a questionable design decision. Said bosses seem to have become easier if such a thing is even possible. Having had the worst hours of my Diablo career while trying to kill Duriel on Nightmare, I started the Belial boss fight with expectations of sky-high mortality rate. Nothing of the sort. It still doesn’t rival our 25 second kill on Maghda, though. Frowns aside, it’s still the best part of the game. Expect our Hell travel notes by the end of the week. Stay tuned! » "All is Normal" where Nydra recollects his very first steps in Diablo III and never speaks about himself in the third person After a 3-month long group stage, the first edition of the Iron Squid tournament flew its top four to Paris, France to give them love, sunshine and $25,000 in prizes. Every foreigner had fallen in the group stage and the semi finals consisted of MMA, Alive, Symbol, NesTea. Every one of them was coming from a difficult Ro8 match, but unquestionably, it was Symbol who drew the shortest straw in MarineKing - a player that had beaten DRG twice in MLG finals and was regarded as the best terran in the world at that time. Symbol reached the final together with MMA and already he was the man of the tournament. Always staying out of the big stages, Symbol had been a terra incognita for the majority of the SC2 fanbase, especially for the ones that never followed GSTL. Symbol's impressive run through the playoffs (including a 3-0 against MKP and 3-1 versus NesTea) won him the right to be the centerpiece of these paragraphs, despite losing in the grand final to the SlayerS ace. Sorry, MMA, you were awesome too and deserve to be in the headline picture. It's just how good you are, not quite as much about Symbol. Is Mvp for real? How did he do it? He is a genius and all but come on... Winning a GSL in spite of bracket? Rewinding back to May 2nd. Mvp makes it to the Ro8 after two runner-up finishes in the group stages. His play had been unconvincing and at first sight nothing had changed in Mvp's slumpland. There are games that reminisce about his former glory, but also ones that are indicative of his diminished form. His first playoff match is against Naniwa, who in fans' eyes is beyond invincible after graduating from the group stage with 8-1. Naniwa's amazing late-game is constantly brought on as an argument backing the predicted demise of Mvp. Instead, the Korean comes out, abuses Naniwa's greedy play, cheeses him thrice and gives a lecture on how match planning is everything. Semi final. May 10th. Against Mvp stands someone way more intimidating than Naniwa - StarTale's crusher of terran hopes Parting. With a 100% win-rate in late-game and uncanny immunity to early-game pressure, Parting is the logical favorite. Very few people who still believe in Mvp remain, as the whole world is betting on Parting to possibly take the entire GSL. And once again careful planning comes to beat statistics to the dirt. A mix of cheeses and heavy mid-game attacks that counter Parting's signature colossus timing tear the protoss apart. 3-1 for Mvp and the whole world has their mouths open in bedazzlement. May 19th, the grand final against ST_Squirtle. All along the line restored is the faith in Mvp but Squirtle remains a dangerous opponent, perhaps even scarier than his team-mate Parting. Thirty minutes into the series and it's already 3-0 for the terran and Squirtle seems doomed. Yet in a heroic feat for the ages, the young protoss fights back and equalizes the score, giving us the now famous Metropolis set that broke the 40-minute mark and had an archon toilet on Battlecruisers... You don't see s**t like that every day. Yet somehow, game seven succeeds in being even more nerve-wrecking. Mvp goes for a bunker rush all-in which prevails over Parting in a game that had me chew my toenails. And the IM terran walked out to raise his fourth GSL trophy and become the first player ever to achieve that deed. Oh, look! It's Symbol again, trying to steal attention away with another second place finish. Not this time, Mr. Kang, this was Violet's tournament and his alone. Near the end of 2011, Violet moved to the USA for the CSN Training Camp in a time where everybody was flying the exact opposite way - to South Korea. Seeing a talented player leave the Mecca of StarCraft 2 - and not even to join a powerful foreign team at that point - was nearly unheard of. After all, even people training in Korea haven't been able to achieve the dream results, so why would Violet run away from the perfect practice environement and exile himself in Texas? Well, beats me. Maybe because he was no longer part of MVP and had no house to practice and/or needed a change of scenery but it doesn't really matter. He won IEM Sao Paulo, finished top four at HomeStory Cup 4, got a top eight at every 2012 MLG he attended and finally brought home the Spring Arena 2 gold. Look at the picture above and remember that smile. All he's saying is In November 2011, Blizzard and Valve entered a dispute about the rights over the brand "Dota" after the latter company registered the name as a trademark in the US Patent Office. Blizzard argued that Valve had no rights over the name as the franchise had its roots in the WarCraft 3 map-making community and has thus been long associated with a game that's a property of Blizzard Entertainment. The notice of opposition, filed on 16/11/2011 had this as it's first clause: Half a year later, the legal suit ends with an agreement that saw Valve as the official winner. The rights over the "Dota" brand remain in Valve and the company will be allowed to use it commercially. Non-commercial custom made products by the Blizzard community can still use the name "Dota", but Blizzard themselves had to pick "All-Stars" as the brand for their commercial products. The former "Blizzard DotA", which is to be released with Heart of the Swarm", has thus been renamed to "Blizzard All-Stars". May has been a cornerstone month in StarCraft 2's history. The long awaited switch of KeSPA players over to SC2 began. The bonjwas and legends of Brood War began practicing for the hybrid SK Planet Proleague and soon began giving interviews about their first impressions of the new game. In an interview for GameChosun, Flash expressed a number of very strong statements that made the community sit in front of their keyboards and type endless walls of texts supporting or disagreeing with the great bonjwa or just simply throwing excrements at game's balance. Protoss might be OP, UP or perfectly balanced but the most important thing is to have it in our minds that these statements came from a person who, according to himself, is still a complete noob in the game. Listening to Flash is always useful and there might be subtle and ingenious insights hidden in his words but the SC2 fanbase should always be on its guard and not take interviews like this as the final decree about the state of the game. But what do I know. I play zerg and to me Protoss seems pretty OP... Ouch! This had to be hurtful to everyone convinced that the Brood War pros will be kings of StarCraft 2 before the calendar year is over. There's still the benefit of the doubt that the Tyrant with the charming smile said that just as an insurance against eventually disappointing StarCraft 2 season. Or in the context of "I got GSL silver on the first try? Well, I guess SC1 skills do not transfer to SC2". Overall, this is sure to cool off the passions of the blind believers and have them look at the switch-over with earthly expectations. Enough talk. Protoss OP, SC1 skills... who cares. . Last month we asked "Flash against Bisu. Who will win?" On June 9th we find out. And with the bracket that is, this might very well be the grand final match. Boy, are we all excited! In early May, the American-based team approached DreamHack Stockholm champion Thorzain with an offer he could not refuse: more money and a Korean training. As neither Mousesports nor any other team that approached Thorzain could meet EG's generous proposal, the Swedish terran changed the red with dark blue, picked his promotional energy drink and joined the roster of Puma, HuK, Idra, JYP and the rest. Training in the SlayerS house is indeed a strong incentive. As a member of EG, Thorzain now has a busy on Korean tournaments schedule. He's seeded into Code S as DH champion and will play alongside the best Koreans in the world as part of the EG/Slayers GSTL joint roster. And if one Swede could bring us so much GSL happiness, imagine what two of them can do. When a writer gets tired of doing the same MLG reviews and previews over and over again (and that happens more often than you might think), he finds another such writer and in an outbreak of uncontrollable goofiness and satirical overflow, the two come out with a piece like that. It is near the time of Spring Arena 2. MarineKing and DongRaeGu already met each other three times, erasing everything else about MLG from people's perceptions. The American league evolves into a MKP/DRG dichotomy and everything is very fishy. Two "marauding journalists" embark on a tongue-in-cheek quest to discover the future of MLG and discover its darkest secrets: the plans for the new "Code Meh", the "Xtreme edition" extended series, the banishment of Parting and much more. Consume in case of laugh deficiency. On May 1st we talked to a very humble (for no reason, really, the guy just won goddamn IPL 4) Alive as part of our "Meet Fnatic" series of features. We asked him how does the unsteady performance affects him (which he apologized about), what kept him at the top of his game during his tumultuous departure from TSL (which he apologized about), how's life in Fnatic's house and what the IPL grand final against Squirtle felt like. In the end, I never got that apologetic attitude, but maybe because I am not from a collectivist culture. It was a genuine pleasure, however, to converse with the diametrical opposite of MC. 11. Barcraft World Tour » Vienna, Austria » Auckland, New Zealand » Zürich, Switzerland » Derby, United Kingdom Our dear colleague Eyal "KOKO" Stern kept flying around the world of barcrafts, reaching as far as New Zealand, collecting all kinds of weird stories along the way. We heard Thomas (Vienna) who plans to register a non-profit eSports organization, officially recognized by Austrian law; Byron (Auckland) who sold charity cupcakes during his first barcrafts and is now helping Blizzard with New Zealands's B.net World Championship Series tournaments; Vinz (Zürich) and his GSL Brunchcraft; and Mason (Derby), whose barcraft is the home of the "MULE" and the "Creep Tumour" cocktails. God damn it, suddenly I have a craving for barcrafting! GosuGamers will return in exactly one month, on July 2nd, with the next portion of "The Month in Headlines". June, let us down! Five days before Diablo III's launch, Amazon.com announced that the highly-expected hack-and-slash game from Blizzard has already made it to the very top of the list of website's most preordered games ever. Although no specific numbers were given, it all looked like analysts' predictions about 5 million copies sold within one calendar year would be buried under a much larger figure. And so they were. 4,7 million copies were distributed in the first day (including those from WoW annual passes). 6,3 million players were registered after the first week and shortly after that, the user count went up all the way to seven million. Diablo III was certainly a groundbreaking financial success for Blizzard. It came with a prize, though. "Error 37" and its cousins were the main villains that displaced the focus away from the game and on to its many problems. The servers were unavailable to the vast majority of the buyers but that was only a dust in the shitwind that would follow. Most players with online game experience knew that those screw-ups are nothing if not normal. Yet the "Error 37" kept returning and even nowadays is not an unfrequent visitor of the login screen. This nuisance of a cameo brought along other technical issues such as unfunctional auction house on a number of occassions, inhumanly high latency and players being thrown out of games or stuck on "Authenticating credentials". The list goes on and on and although there's been a decline in the frequency of those appearances, the bitter taste in the community's mouth is not yet washed away. And then there was the account hacking described in paragraph #5 below. Back to stuff that are sincerely fun, the secret pony level was discovered shortly after Diablo 3 launched. Speculations about the "new cow level" were hovering the internet for quite some time (years, really) since Blizzard came out with this art after being accused of Diablo 3 being too shiny and WoW-y. The dispute about if the jolly graphic really persisted in the actual game, still goes on, but there's one place about which there can be no doubt. Whimsyshire, the land of killer unicorns, is a magical land where you can behead pink ponies and plushy bears and loot smiling cloud chests. No data exists about what Blizzard were smoking but there is a detailed guide about how to get to the secret level. Just follow the link in the paragraph title and you will be taken there. "You will be stuck on Act II for weeks," said Bashiok in one of his pre-launch posts, hyping the unsurmountable difficulty of Inferno. Not the Method guys, apparently. Five days after Diablo III hit the shelves, the world saw the fisrt Diablo kill on Inferno at the hands of a barbarian, monk, wizard and a witch doctor. But the impressive feat did not remain untarnished for long. People that closely followed Method's stream pointed out the use of a resplendent chest exploit in Act II and a technique that cheats around Diablo's shadow phase, essentially having two people dying deliberatly so that Diablo can spawn just two shadow clones. A quick revive follows and it's an uneven 4v2 battle in Method's favor. With exploits or not, however, the achievement stands true - Method are the world first guild to 4-man Diablo on Inferno! As if the shaky launch of Diablo III was not enough, players were treated to yet another unpleasant surprise - an abundant amount of account hackings, caused by players joining unhealthy public games. Characters were robbed of money and clothes with their only remaining hope being writing to Blizzard's support team and hoping that their progress can be backdated to its previous state. To answer community's cries, Blizzard came out with a series of blue posts, essentially explaining that Battle.net itself is a safe platform and players should take extra care when protecting their accounts. Online and offline Battle.net authenticators as well as the newly introduced Battle.net SMS Protect were mentioned as the best methods of protection at company's and players' disposal and Blizzard encouraged everybody to get one. Whether or not there is an actual breach in Diablo III's public game and trade system and SQL sessions are being stolen in spite of authenticators or is it all user negligence remains to be seen. Putting away the unpleasantries for good this time, we continue on to the "Development Hell" secret level, also known as "The Better Ending Credits". Development Hell is a rare-spawn dungeon in the Cemetery of the Forsaken (Act I) where the player gets to cut through Zombies and Wretched Mothers named after different game developers, including the enormous Unburied champion Jay Wilson, Game Director. It's easier to access than the pony level so I suggest you read our guide and try squeezing a rare or a legendary out of Jay. Be gentle, though, the D3 team is already getting quite a beating around the forums. Datamining was very common during the beta days as the IT brains hunger for hidden Diablo treasures drilled deep into game's files to discover secrets that ordinary users would never find. Right after the launch, the miners went quiet for a while (busy actually playing the game no doubt) until images of the PvP arenas were found among the game directories. As you know, PvP will launch with patch 1.1. (to be released at an unspecified moment in the future) and those pictures are very small crumbs, but somehow sufficient for the time being, to feed our curiosity. Of course, nothing is ever final but this time the datamining may just be 100% correct. These two VODs were of the first pure displays of gear superiority over Act I content that we featured on GosuGamers. Number one came from , a witch doctor who broke the record of Butcher's fastest kill on Inferno. He did it in nine seconds, made it onto every Diablo news site and got people talking about how imba the Witch Doctor is. The second VOD belongs to one of the most popular Barbarians out there - . In a time when everybody complained about how Barbarians can't make it past Act II on Inferno, Krip laughed in their faces while soloing three elite pack at a time and making a statement about the actual Barbarian viability. Of course, much water flowed under the bridge since then and the demonstrations of power nowadays are much more impressive. For example, you can check Athene's response to the andy2tokes' video. To think I consider myself lucky when I get past the first couple of quests on Act II... As Diablo III started collecting more and more criticism aimed at literally every design decision, Blizzard announced that they will be posting an article on the game changes to be implemented with the next few patches. The post was large and thorough and addressed some of the most ailing topics such as difficulty in Inferno, the close to useless crafting system and the item generator that had weaker then blues legendary items. Justified was also the nerfing or overhauling of skills and runes than made and broke certain builds. All in all, it was a good enough promise that the game would take the correct turn and eventually end up where everybody wants it to be. Although there were numerous issues that remained unaddressed in the article, it comes as a comfort that changes will start pouring in so soon after release. In one of the best constructive feedback posts I've seen in a while, Battle.net user Matthest proposed 35 small improvements that could be applied to make Diablo a better game. The topic got incredibly high ratings on both Battle.net and /r/diablo and naturally, Bashiok was quick to respond to it. From Bashiok's answers we learn a few details about Patch 1.0.3. as many of Matthest's suggestions have already been on Blizzard's to-do list such as more auction house filters and possibility to sell damaged items, resizable chat window, improvements to the social system and a buff icon for Magic Weapon. The community manager also promises to keep many of the suggestions in mind - like improved "Quick Join" system, detailed list on all auction house transactions and sold items stats, and a "build saver" - and pass them onto development team. Even if half of the suggested improvements are taken into account and installed by the end of the year, together with the game design changes described in previous paragraph, Diablo III will start looking as the finely polished product that all the fans craved for. Our StarCraft 2 barcraft expert Eyal "KOKO" Stern took a short break from competitive RTS and wrote this amazing guide that will help all newcomers to Diablo III Hardcore. His advices soon made it to Diablo's official Facebook page, breaking all viewership records of the Diablo III section. Not much more need be said. Read the article, heed his wisdom and if you are man enough - try it out on the harrowing fields. In a long recently published article, our Diablo 3 writer Stefan "Devt" Kreutz sucked his teeth into the simmering topic of "Is Inferno unfarily hard or is all that whining justified". Devt discusses the current meta game, talks about which classes have it harder in the game, where does the dissatisfaction originate from, is there a misconception of how progression through Inferno acts should occur and what direction should the tuning of Inferno take. Devt writes: "The game is barely three weeks old and already players have progressed faster and further than Blizzard imagined they would; this is very much their own fault, as World of Warcraft serves as an excellent precedent for never underestimating your playerbase; however, it also serves as precedent for the fact that the loudest part of a population is not always the one that needs to be listened to." The next pair of features, written by yours truly, comes as travel notes from the vintage point of a Barbarian doing his first cruise through the game's content. In "All is Normal" we put first impressions and hyped expectations on the scale, praise many of the game mechanics but also frown at peculiar or downright wrong design decisions, and discuss why Diablo III cannot get a 10/10 with the way it is now. A week later, we returned with another "Interstate 1-60" feature, this time covering Nightmare difficulty and all its beauty. We riffle through more travel notes in oder to pinpoint which are the scariest elite packs on Nightmare, how skill builds evolve as the player progresses further and what the best itemization that'll prepare someone for Hell is. Expect us to be back in one month time with another summary like this. Stay tuned in the meanwhile, as we certainly have even more awesome stuff prepared for June. Rain makes his GSL debut in the second 2010 Open Season but as he's eliminated in the Ro32 he passes under fans' radar. An understandable outcome, as it is easy to be overshadowed by the very hot terrans of that time such as MarineKing, Maka, Jinro, Boxer and Mvp. Fortunately, Rain does not disappear from the scene and re-qualifies for 2010 Open Season 3, which is to become his most successful tournament to date. In the Ro32, Rain meets an invigorated with a BlizzCon championship Genius - one of the most dreaded protosses of that time, along with oGsMC. Rain is in the position of the heavy underdog but after a series of cheeses and one base plays, he eliminates Genius from the tournament, as well as Squirtle and the Season 2 champion and then best zerg in the world NesTea in the next two rounds. After becoming the focus of community's displeasure as a result, Rain apologizes for his style of play and proceeds to beat HongUn in a very standard semi-final. Rain advances to the grand final against all odds but there MC puts a stop to his championship hopes and defeats him 4-1. On June 14th, Rain leaves TSL for what would in time become the most common reason for such an action - joining a foreign team and actively participating in international tournaments. On June 25th, Seo-Yong signs with Fnatic and announces that he will be moving to the United States. A month after the transfer, Rain makes an appearance at MLG Anaheim, representing his new team and, more importantly, his new play style. The cheesing, one-basing terran is no more as Rain makes his way through the open bracket, crushes his group 5-0 and on Championship Sunday comes out to play one of the most spectacular games that the tournament has ever seen. His opponent is the world-famous Emperor SlayerS_Boxer and the two engage in an insane 72 minute long TvT on Metalopolis which Rain wins to once again make a name of himself. In a much more positive fashion this time, however. Photo by: Cameron Carson On March 19th, FnaticRC open a training house in South Korea and Rain moves back to his homeland. We sat down with him for a small chat to see how things are going for Rain, is he planning a return to the top and what does he think about KeSPA's transition over to SC2. I'm practicing a lot these days to be a top player and you can expect to be what I do from now. I'm glad that people make .gifs about that. At the beginning of the game, I was really in a disadvantage compared to Boxer but because I made it to the late-game, I managed to win. That was about 2 years ago and I really don't care about what people call me or think of me. I wasn't a BroodWar Pro but I really played a lot and it's kind of helpful. I knew many Korean players would transfer to foreign teams someday and ever since one or two players moved, it's now a normal thing. I think even more players will move. My team mates are getting better and that makes it hard for me to beat them. I liked to stay in the US but the circumstances were not that great and I'm better in staying with someone else so I decided to stay in Korea. To be honest, I prefer playing in Korea. Yes, I do. I prefer minimalistic atmosphere. In my opinion, Fnatic is the weakest but I think we can reach Semi-Final. I think the communication between manager and players are the best among all the teams. Yes, I have those. I plan to top that runner-up finish from a long time ago Nothing special really. Yes, it's definitely an opportunity. No, I'm not scared and I really don't care about that. I don't believe that they will be able to that. Always feel grateful about the sponsors. And to fans, I'm practicing a lot these days. I will show you some awesome games and win some tournaments/leagues. See you at the matches! "I am not scared of Koreans at all!" "I feel pity for WarCraft's demise" "Conversing with foreigners allows me to learn more" Round 2 in a Nutshell Taking just a quick look from far above it would not seem like huge changes came to pass after round 2 of the SPL. Woongjin are still holding the #1 spot, last season's finalist SKT and KT Rolster are still hovering in the bottom part of the ranking and Air Force Ace, recently confirmed to disband in two years time, are still last with less than zero hopes of making the playoffs. A closer examination, however, reveals that there was more than meets the eye. With WCG and WCS qualifiers passing under the sign of nonames advancing at the expense of the bonjwas, Round 2 was an honest relief for one of the most beloved, respected and feared pro-gamers of all time: Team 8's Jaedong. JD finished Round 1 with the disappointing record of 1-3 in StarCraft 2 matches - a statistics not exactly tailored towards The Tyrant's renommee. In just one round, however, JD got his s**t together and swam out of the negative score, hopping at a final 6-5 while, most importantly, winning three ace matches for his team against Air Force Ace, STX Soul and the leaders in the SPL ranking Woongjin Stars. Below, we will go through every game of Jaedong he played in round two, but first it's time for nutshelling the Proleague and its second round of matches. retain leadership position in the overall ranking after Round 2 with 9-6 in series and +18 in points retain leadership position in SC2 games with 15-6 in series The second in the overall ranking, , are tied with Woongjin in series but are a whole 15 points behind finished first in Round 2 with 6-1 record climbed four spots in the overall ranking after Round 2 Team 8's is the only player to be at +3 ace match record SK Telecom T1's finishes Round 2 with the highest personal score in SC2: 9-4 Samsung KHAN's has the best score in SC2 out of the the TBLS: 5-2 CJ Entus' is the player with most SC2 games in the Proleague after Round 2: 14 SK Telecom T1's continues to be the worst performing player in the Proleague with 0-5 Rise of the Tyrant: The Games Jaedong began his personal Round 2 run with two ZvPs on Antiga Shipyard, resulting in a win against BeSt and a loss against Round 1 MVP hero as well but CJ Entus's protoss, in his final desperation attack, found a juicy prey right inside JD's main. Both played in the same day and in the same match, the games were an opportunity for Jaedong to show that he had retained his godly ZvZ status from the Brood War days. Being outmacroed and outplayed every step of the way on Cloud Kingdom did not exactly polish JD's image but on Entombed certainly made the necessary amends. Jaedong, it seemed, was in better SC2 shape than ever, something strongly supported by the fact that Cloud Kingdom was his last loss for this round. If the cheese deflection in the series against Soulkey spoke kindly enough for Jaedong's ever-improving skills, the games against Trap and Guemchi took it all one step further. Tyrant's playstyle was coherent with his monicker and the protoss players played the unfortunate role of JD's sinful subordinates who were punished in front of everybody, humiliation and mockery delivered with every hit. Guemchi was the first to be whipped for daring to go for a 7-gate revolt. He was swarmed and evaporated. Next was Trap, hanged for the audacity to go DTs. For audience's amusement, he suffered a prolonged mutalisk harass that had him stumbling inbetween his three bases, trying to defend them against the deadly flock with touching mulishness. With 5-5 before his last match for the round, Jaedong knew that he had to make it count. Not only for himself but for Team 8 as well, who, due to their very rocky start in round 1, had to fight for every single set if they wanted to catch up to the leaders Woongjin and CJ. The game opened with another deflected 10-pool rush but evolved way past the early game, reaching those rarely interesting all-roach confrontantions that are so often the trademark of ZvZ mid-game. An above-average series entertainment-wise, but the one that brought Jaedong to a positive score and helped Team 8 climb four spots in the overall ranking. It were good six weeks to be a bonjwa in transition for Jaedong. Transition Tracker and Standings . Players Statistics Ace 2 1 -2 1 0 3 1 0 0 -1 Teams Statistics afer round 2 Ace -2 1 2 0 0 -2 0 1 Round 2 Standings +9 -1 +3 +3 -1 -3 -4 -6 Overall Standings +18 +7 +3 +1 0 -3 -7 -19 Heart of the Swarm: Facts Heart of the Swarm™ is the first expansion set to Blizzard Entertainment's sci-fi real-time strategy game StarCraft® II: Wings of Liberty™. Heart of the Swarm continues the epic story from Wings of Liberty with an all-new campaign that focuses on Kerrigan, the former Queen of Blades. In the Heart of the Swarm campaign, players will be able to evolve their swarms with unique, campaign-only units and abilities, and this evolution will happen in an organic manner befitting of the expansion's zerg theme. Kerrigan will also play a major role in each of the battles as a powerful hero. Over the course of the campaign, she will grow in strength and earn new abilities, and players will choose which powers to enhance and use from mission to mission. New multiplayer units and maps will add new dimensions of strategic gameplay, and the expansion will include new features and upgrades to the Battle.net® online platform to improve the custom-game experience. » Continues the epic story of StarCraft II from where Wings of Liberty left off » Approximately 20 new campaign missions »New campaign gameplay mechanics, allowing players to evolve new abilities and units for their zergarmy » Go into battle with Kerrigan as she tries to restore her strength and regain control of the Swarm » New multiplayer units and maps, expanding strategic choice and gameplay depth for each race » Expanded features and functionality for Battle.net to improve custom-game search, and new tools for map authors to create even more epic custom games » New pre-rendered and in-game cinematics bring the story of Heart of the Swarm to life Units and abilities Please keep in mind that Heart of the Swarm is still in development, and all of the units and abilities you see described below are subject to change. It's even possible that some of these units and abilities will be discarded and new ones will be created to replace them as we continue to iterate on the game design. What we've listed below is just a snapshot of where we currently stand on multiplayer Heart of the Swarm. Protoss Upon analyzing data from their most recent battles, the protoss have identified a few areas of improvement that would help them maximize effectiveness against their enemies. Based on their findings, the protoss have augmented their arsenal with an extremely long-range attacker, additional psionic units, and a new form of enemy harassment. Description: The tempest is a new capital ship that can fire at both ground and air targets from long range, doing additional damage to massive units. A further range upgrade can be researched to give the Tempest the ability to fire from incredible distances. Description: The Oracle is a psionic warship, built from a Stargate, that uses several unique abilities to raid and harass the enemy. The first is Entomb, which can temporarily block mineral fields from being harvested. Another ability, Preordain, grants detection and vision around a targeted building, allowing the protoss to see which units or technologies are being researched. Rounding out its kit is Cloak Field, which temporarily cloaks everything around the Oracle. Description: The Mothership Core is unique in more ways than one. Only a single one can exist in your army at once and it's also immobile, attaching itself to a nexus. There are four abilities available from the Mothership Core. Teleport allows you to move the Mothership Core to any of your other nexuses. Energize tops off the energy stores of any target unit or structure. Purify is a defensive ability that temporarily grants the Mothership Core a powerful, long range attack. Finally, Mass Recall allows players to quickly recall units back to the Mothership Core. Mothership It's not really a new unit in Heart of the Swarm, but the Mothership abilities are slightly different from Wings of Liberty. The passive cloaking field is gone, with the cloak now available as an activated ability on the Oracle. The Mothership retains its Recall ability, and the Vortex spell from Wings of Liberty now affects ground units only. A new ability called Stasis is available, which puts the mothership and all air units around it into stasis for about 20 seconds. The Mothership is now created by upgrading the Mothership Core after a Fleet Beacon is constructed. **In the current multiplayer build of Heart of the Swarm, the protoss are not able to deploy Carriers. However, we have not yet made a final determination on the Carrier's status. Terran The resourceful terrans have also been improving their technology to better survive their battles in the Koprulu sector. Description: The Widow Mine is a new suicide unit built from the Factory that allows the terran player to control areas of the battlefield. The Widow Mine moves into position and sets to stationary mode, which burrows and activates it. When an enemy air or ground unit moves into range, the Widow Mine briefly flashes before moving and attaching itself to that unit. After several seconds, the mine detonates, dealing 200 damage to the unit and a smaller amount of damage to units in the surrounding area. Description: The Warhound is a walking ground mech that is specialized as an anti-mechanical weapon. Smaller and more nimble than a Thor, the Warhound has a standard weapon to hit ground. Its true strength is an additional ability that fires powerful missiles at ground-based mechanical units, making it particularly well suited to taking out enemy siege lines and many protoss ground units. The Hellion has been upgraded to a transforming unit similar to the Viking. When constructed from the factory, the Hellion spawns in its new battle mode, which gives it additional hit points and a stronger flame attack that covers a short forward-facing arc. This makes the Hellion more effective in late-game fights against large clusters of light units such as Zealots. The player can opt to transform the Hellion into its original, more mobile form as well. In Heart of the Swarm, the Battlecruiser gains a cooldown-based speed-boost ability called Redline Reactor. Finally, the Reaper no longer has a special building attack. Instead, it gains a passive health-regeneration upgrade that allows it to recharge hit points quickly when out of combat. Zerg The zerg continue to evolve and adapt to changing environments, particularly the dangers they face on the battlefield. New creatures will help the zerg stage more effective sieges and add unique enemy-manipulating abilities to their arsenal. Description: The Viper is a new flying unit with three unique abilities. Blinding Cloud temporarily reduces the attack range of biological ground units inside the cloud to melee range. Abduct allows the Viper to physically pull a unit to the Viper’s location. Finally, the Viper can use Consume, a channeled ability that allows it to gain some energy back at the expense of damage to your own zerg building. Description: The Swarm Host is a slow-moving ground unit that has no standard attack. When burrowed, the Swarm Host spawns a continuous stream of slow-moving units called Locusts that can be used to lay siege and pressure entrenched enemy positions. Ultralisks have a new Burrow Charge skill that lets them dive underground and quickly surface at a target, allowing them to initiate the fight faster on a crowded battlefield. However, its "frenzy" passive from Wings of Liberty has been removed, meaning the Ultralisk can now be snared by abilities like Fungal Growth. The Overseer has been retained from Wings of Liberty, and changelings can now be spawned from siege range. Finally, the Hydralisk has a new upgrade that allows them to move faster while not on creep. Heart of the Swarm: FAQ A: Heart of the Swarm™ is the first expansion set to Blizzard Entertainment's sci-fi real time strategy game StarCraft® II: Wings of Liberty™. Heart of the Swarm continues the epic story from Wings of Liberty with an all-new campaign that focuses on Sarah Kerrigan, the former Queen of Blades. New multiplayer units and maps will also be included in the expansion, as well as new features and upgrades to the Battle.net® online platform. A: Heart of the Swarm's campaign will include 20 new missions. Players will be able to evolve their swarms with unique, campaign-only units and abilities, and this evolution will happen in an organic manner befitting of the expansion's zerg theme. As an example, zerglings can evolve into specialized sub-species of zerglings such as the swarmling, a variant that spawns three swarmlings per larva at an almost instantaneous rate instead of the standard two zerglings. The fearsome raptor is another evolutionary offshoot of the zergling that has more health and the ability to leap short distances to quickly close the gap on an enemy. Another aspect of Heart of the Swarm that sets it apart from Wings of Liberty is that Kerrigan will play a major role in each of the battles as a powerful hero. Over the course of the campaign she gains in strength as well as new capabilities. Players will choose what abilities to enhance and powers to use from mission to mission. Heart of the Swarm will also include a wider variety of locations, or sets, for players to explore between missions. These sets change dynamically as players complete missions, giving players a sense of an evolving world as Kerrigan makes her presence felt throughout the galaxy. Fully voiced cut scenes will round out the cinematic gaming experience in Heart of the Swarm's campaign, while a new array of achievements will unlock in-game rewards such as portraits and decals. A: We'll be making some improvements to the graphics, including upgrades to the look and behavior of zerg creep, as well as some changes that allow our artists to better showcase the new types of planets that Kerrigan will explore in Heart of the Swarm. We still plan to keep the minimum hardware requirements the same for this expansion set as they were in Wings of Liberty. A: We're very pleased with the state of multiplayer in Wings of Liberty. Over the past year, the metagame has evolved as players are continuously developing new strategies and counters, while we've tried to make measured changes to game balance through patches. However, we recognize that there are still areas for improvement. Heart of the Swarm gives us an opportunity to address some of those needs through new units and abilities, which we're typically not willing to make outside of an expansion as they can have a serious effect on current tournaments. With Heart of the Swarm, we've tried to locate the needs of each race and address them with new units and abilities. We're also trying to maintain -- and if possible, enhance -- the uniqueness of each race. The goal with everything we create for multiplayer Heart of the Swarm is to add new dimensions of strategy and gameplay to StarCraft, while maintaining balance and avoiding redundancy with existing units. A: First, it's important to note that units and abilities are still very much subject to change. What we're currently showing only represents a snapshot of where multiplayer Heart of the Swarm currently stands, and these are just a few examples of the new units and abilities coming in Heart of the Swarm. For the zerg, the new Swarm Host will serve as a ground-based siege unit. When burrowed, the Swarm Host will spawn melee units that slowly move in a stream toward enemy units or structures. This will allow the zerg to apply pressure on entrenched enemy positions. We're also testing a new ability for the Ultralisk, called Burrow Charge, which will allow them to more easily get into the fight on a crowded battlefield. This activated ability will allow an Ultralisk to dive underground, quickly advance underneath units, and pop back up to attack enemies. The protoss will field an interesting new unit called the Oracle. This unit is a psionic warship, built from a Stargate, that uses unique abilities to raid and harass the enemy. The first is Entomb, which can temporarily block mineral fields from being harvested. Another ability, Preordain, grants detection and vision around a targeted building, allowing the protoss to see which units or technologies are being researched. The tempest is a new capital ship that can fire at both ground and air targets from long range, doing additional damage to massive units. A further range upgrade can be researched to give the Tempest the ability to fire from incredible distances. The terrans will have some new tricks as well. The Hellion will be given a new ability to transform into a walking battle mech. In this alternate form, Hellions will move slower, but gain health and deal higher damage in a shorter spray of flame. Battlecruisers will get a short cooldown-based speed-boost ability (Redline Reactor). This speed boost will help with positioning these terran capital ships and engaging in late-game battles. The Warhound has also been introduced: an anti-vehicle mech unit. We're also testing a new gameplay mechanic for maps: destructible rock pillars that can create a blockade at a choke point. This mechanic will allow players to close off pathways, block themselves into expansion bases, or protect scouts holding position on an elevated Xel'Naga watch tower. A: We're already beta testing Arcade, which upgrades our custom map functionality on Battle.net. The mapmaking and modding community around StarCraft II has published tens of thousands of custom maps using the StarCraft II editor. The Arcade allows us to better showcase this wide variety of great new maps and mods to players who are looking for fun new gaming experiences. We want players to be able to more easily find, rate, and sort through all the great custom maps that have been created. For map creators, we're adding even more tools for them to create compelling custom games. These tools will include a cinematics editor for players to create their own cut scenes, and a 3D model importing tool which will allow artists to bring their own models into the game for use in custom maps. These are just a couple of the improvements and new features we're developing to better support the mapmaking and machinima community in their quest to create fun and compelling content. Other features we have planned for around the time of launch include a groups and clans system; multilanguage support; Global Play, to allow players to play on different regional servers; and unranked matchmaking, so players can try playing different races or test new strategies without impacting their ladder ranking. Multiplayer replay viewing and the ability to resume a multiplayer game from replay will also be included. We'll have more details on these and other Battle.net updates at a later date. A: For the regions that have a standard box business model such as North America and Europe, yes, StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty will be required in order to play the Heart of the Swarm expansion. For other regions that have alternative access models, we’ll provide details at a later date. Q: How much will Heart of the Swarm cost? A: We typically don't provide details about pricing until the game is closer to release. We do view Heart of the Swarm as an expansion set, so for the regions that have a standard box business model such as North America and Europe, we will price accordingly. For other regions that have alternative business models, we’ll provide details at a later date. A: StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm is being developed for Windows and Mac. We currently have no plans to bring StarCraft II to any console platform. A: It's too early to talk about a specific release date at this point in time. As with all Blizzard games, our ultimate goal is to provide the best possible experience for our players, and we will take as much time as is needed to ensure that Heart of the Swarm meets the expectations of our players, as well as our own high standards. A: Yes, we do intend to run a beta test for Heart of the Swarm multiplayer, and we expect it to start sometime in the summer of 2012. It will be very similar, certainly. We’re looking at doing a rescan of the entire UI, obviously for HotS to get that zerg theme, and there’s stuff we want to rearrange in terms of how it’s laid out as we add new features to HotS such as groups and clans and all that stuff. Some places of the UI get too complicated and they’ll have to be fixed up a bit but it’ll be very similar. No, I think what they are referring to as “sets” is like when you are playing through WoL, you are stationed aboard the Hyperion from where you chose your missions. Now you come back to Kerrigan’s leviathan but the leviathan is landed on a planet so the background will change depending on which planet it’s on. So when you are on Char, for example, you’ll see the red wasteland. No, the nydus worm didn’t look quite ready for being shown today. The art was super rough, the art guys were super rushed into getting something done and it didn’t hit. It was really bad. We had only temp stuff, we didn’t get the chance to do anything. We’re still very passionate about the idea, it’s still in the build and when we launch a beta it will most certainly be there unless we feel awful about it but I don’t think we will. So there are two new nydus worm that you can make from the nydus network. One is a nydus worm that spews creep in a direction, quite a distance right now so you can create a creep highway and go wherever you want to go. And the second is a nydus worm that you can spawn and attack enemy building only, no units. So you can use that when the mutalisk raid gets shut down which it often does: there are too many mutalisks on the map, the blink stalkers are out, the photon cannons are in play, maybe the thors and the widow mines are out. Then there are no more mutalisks and the zerg raiding just ends. In this case, the raiding will be able to continue. You can’t kill workers with it but potentially you can kill key pylons, damage or kill tech labs, stuff like that. And there’s still the regular nydus worm so there are three worms in total that can be produced. No, it basically normalizes and equalizes the speeds on creep and off creep. The hydra cheats a little bit. The hydra has a much more substantial bonus speed on creep than anybody else. Other units have a standard 32% increase and the hydra has a much larger number. This will normalize it a bit so it’s much more like other zerg units which are pretty fast on the ground and a little faster on creep. I think the reaper plays much very differently from the roach. Because the roach really cannot maneuver that much. It can move while burrow but it’s not really a raider in that sense. The reaper moves much faster so I think it’s not a realistic comparison. I think you can say that the tempest is very similar to the carrier, I think that’s definitely a concern. They are both siege ranged, attacks air and ground units which is why we are not showing the carrier anymore. We think that the carrier will not make it. But if you want to be really mean to the tempest, I think you can say it’s very similar to the brood lord but which can hit both air and ground. Those units existed in Broodwar too. So a wraith and a scout are pretty similar, both have a weak ground weapon, both have powerful missiles against air, the scout’s tougher, the wraith has cloak – aah, they are pretty different – but they are not different. They just counter a lot of the same things. We’re just doing the best we can. I’ve certainly heard complaints from some players that in the original StarCraft, the siege tank and the lurker were very similar. They both stop, they both deploy, they both do splash damage but come on – they are not that similar, right? So it’s up to us to make them very different. The one reason we’re pushing the range of the Tempest to 22 is to say “OK, this is a long ranged weapon, guys, this is not a brood lord. This is something that can be in a different part of the map and still hit.” We’ll see how that works out. It is, it’s very light for its cost. That, or be comfortable with a light amount of damage and say “Look, I am not going to kill you with this but you can’t stay there forever. I am chipping away at you, I am not killing everything but I am beating you pretty good. You have to move away, or engage this tempest or figure something out because you have limited time to do it.” And that’s the other reason why I think it feels different than a standard artillery unit. Because the standard artillery units, like the siege tank, are all like “No, you are dead. You need to move immediately.” The tempest is like “Yeah, he’s working away at my nexus and this is a problem. But it’s not a problem I need to solve in four seconds, it’s a problem I need to solve in 30 seconds, or maybe a minute.” And that creates a different kind of feeling. Yes, absolutely! We have about 20 new maps that will be in the final game. We are mostly doing 4-player maps for the ladder these days but the ladder changes every few months anyways, so it’s almost not important what will there be in this first HotS ladder rotation, which will probably a mix of Swarm and Wings maps. So I don’t know what the ladder rotation will look like. We’ve seen the tendency of a general growth in size as the games are getting more macro oriented. When we look back in the beta I remember having stuff like Steppes of War and our biggest map being Desert Oasis at this point. And now I’m seeing maps where protoss is taking an early third and I’m like “What is going on?” *laughs* “This is a very different game than the one we launched two years ago.” Now we see terrans and protosses early expanding which is much different to the beta. This is evolution and the evolution will continue: I don’t know to where as a lot of this is dictated by the maps the community like to play, the kinds of things happening during the games. No, it’s cool, I think it’s working. I had concerns initially about the maps getting too large and that would create an environment which would be all about hiding expansions. And we’re seeing a little bit of that but I think as the community gets better at the game, this becomes less of a concern. I think if we had done those huge maps on day one, that’s what the game would’ve been: the player who wins is the player who hides the expansions the best. But as the community leveled up during those two years, I think this threat has diminished substantially. Even in silver and gold. I think we can do better, certainly. I think zergs have difficulties pushing. Even when zerg gets a significant advantage in the mid-game, until they get brood lords there’s nothing much to do if the enemy is reasonably defended. They have to expand and hope, but that gives the opponent the chance to tech and so it’d be nice for zergs when they really have a crushing victory mid-field to go “And now you are in trouble” as opposed to “Well, I guess I’ll expand” which is kind of how it goes now. If felt less good than It could be and we wanted to experiment and see what zergs can do with the ability to really execute a killing blow or really pressure the enemy. For protoss, we really felt like the stargate was underutilized and not because there’s no stuff there – there isn’t anything that they should not be building at all. So we felt we needed to make some more offering to the stargate to make it a bit more diverse experience for players. We also feel like the protoss lack a couple of things such as the ability to raid: you can do something with blink stalker play and some more with warp prism and it’s cool but it’s not super effective except on pro-player level. The protoss also had difficulty pushing in the early game: they could either go all in or they can hide, because sentries are slow, zealots are slow. You can go pure stalker, surely, but when you move against zerg you better be sure you can win, because you are not coming home if you don’t: those sentries will be ran over and killed and that’s a lot of gas. So we feel that the recall ability on the mothership core gives the protoss the ability to take a chance – one chance – to be kind of aggressive and then pull the units back if it goes wrong. And then for terrans – TvT matches can get a little stale. Pro players have shown how they can break that but even then it can evolve into Viking wars and tank lines and we’d like to see more options for players to get out of those scenarios. And terrans never ever go factory against protoss. Ever. And we don’t want to make it a dominant strategy, we want to make it an option for terran players. We’d like them to go “OK, I can either go mech, or I can go bio. What does the map dictate? What do I think my opponent’s going to do?” So we think there are definitely opportunities for improvements. It’s a different take on the same concept. Something that can give you board control but that is away from your main forces. I think it’s a very clean version. The shredder had a couple of really key problems. One, we’ve had troubles balancing it properly, it was either too strong or too weak and we never found the sweet spot. The other problem was that it was very fiddly: it was easy to accidently move one of your units in range and shut it down. You think “Why is my shredder not firing” and it’s because you have an SCV in range – it was really easy to make a mistake and it felt really bad. But the main problem was seen in gold leagues and below where it would be all about raiding. You would drop it at someone’s mineral line, they would not notice and *boom* they would lose everything. Game over. And the guy is like “Wow, that felt bad!” And I would bet you that this would happen in masters and grandmasters as well. Maybe with time we could’ve make it work but it was broken, alright. We thought about having it attack air but not attack workers and we were like “Wait, what?” and then we talked about making it not affect hovering units and then players were killing it with drones. And I don’t want my badass machine being overrun by three drones. It was just not the right idea. does a lot of the same things but in much cleaner way. The carrier is in question. We’ve heard a lot of complaints from players who want the carrier to be in and I haven’t yet heard an argument about why it has to be in except “It’s cool, don’t take it out!”. Yes, but I think we’ve shown that the game can work with many of the old units gone and can still be a fun gameplay experience. We went through a lot of that in Wings, removing the medic and the reaver and we got a good game despite that those units are not here. I don’t know, we’re still not sure and we’re waiting for the feedback that will say “OK, here’s a real good reason to keep it”. And then again, it could be nostalgia. We could just leave it in. It bothers me from a design perspective that we would keep something useless in the game just a colossus but we needed to make room for the units, we needed to have new cool stuff. Nostalgia is not enough of a reason and have in mind that the reaver had legitimate gameplay, right? Carriers don’t have that. They are just pretty. I’m nervous about the widow mine. It might prove very difficult to balance, because it’s a unit that sacrifices itself to attack and the price of it is difficult to get correct. If you make it expensive it becomes useless except for very big things and if you make it cheap it becomes used for everything and it’s very difficult to adjust. We did a lot of work on the baneling throughout this years – oh my God we did a lot of work on that unit – and is even more fiddly than the baneling. Potentially, yeah, but it’s always something we can change or cut. It is 200 gas for the unit and it does have an energy cost which can be whatever we want. It has an upgrade cost which can be whatever we want to be. So we have the ability to control where it lands. And it’s also more vulnerable than the mothership. The MS is kinda hard to kill sometimes but these guys are really light. A couple of Vikings and *snap* it’s gone, right, and these things don’t cloak each other. So I think it’s balanceable and I’m not too worried about that. Gone, absolutely gone. Executed and never returned, no problem. It’s not about how many units we have, it’s about the quality. We have a very big room to cut. Even if we remove one unit from each race, we’d still have a big, confident expansion pack. If we have to cut 2 or 3 units, it’s back to the drawing board. And that’s why we say we won’t launch till we are ready, right, because we won’t. So if we get to a point where we say “Oh god, these are all awful, I guess we are not shipping right away, are we?” that’s not going to work. Yes, the viper/hydra combo is especially effective and now the hydras with their mobility can be used to run around and protect all those bases and the viper gives you that extra reach. When you run into a siege tank line, it usually ends your mobility. But now you can start pulling those out. It’s a gas heavy mix, certainly, but they can do a lot of damage. Well, I’ve certainly seen that with nydus, and overlord drops and mutalisks the zerg can be very mobile and aggressive but I think we can do way better for sure. And we know that if we provide more options, the players will come out with new strategies. It’s not an unreasonable question but I don’t know, depends on when we ship. Usually, we’ll shut down a month before launch and when we can’t make any more changes. First, we have to finish that 1.5 patch that’s coming, there are few bugs still there. So when that’s done, we’ll start thinking when can the beta be released. And then we calculate when we’ll ship. I don’t think you’ll see a bunch of them initially. I was talking to Alan Yes, I think all the new units are coming along pretty well. Of course, these are not final-final units that are going to the beta or the actual game but as of today we feel very strong about them and of course after this MLG event we’ll have many people that have played it and a lot of people that have watched the battle reports, people that have read up on the new units so I think a lot of things will be shaken up internally, but as of right now I feel pretty confident. I don’t think there has been any easy unit to develop, to be honest, but the Warhound changed a lot from Blizzcon to up until now. It had so much overlap with the Thor as well as the Goliath from StarCraft 1 and Thors are such key units right now, especially against zergs that use mutalisks, so I we tried many different versions of the Warhound and now we’re at the tenth plus version of it so I guess maybe that was the second hardest. Usually, the way the development process works is we have a group of multiplayer game designers, including myself, and we usually bounce different ideas off of each other. So let’s say I bring in an idea, and someone else improves it a little bit, someone else improves a little bit and then I improve it a little bit. So it gets lost whose idea the final unit actually is. There are a lot of units that we try and fail and it’s either me bringing up an idea and someone shooting it right there as he has something really smart to say about it; or we talk through it in detail for a week, we implement it and in the actual gameplay it feels completely different to how we imagined it. So we go through a lot of units but as far as what is my specific idea is really hard to say. Yes, of course, but we have experience from balancing in the past, using Wings of Liberty beta as well as learning lessons throughout the course of the game. So we feel pretty confident that we can do just as good of a job in short time because of the lessons learned and we hope not to repeat any mistakes from the past. Putting units into the multiplayer is a lot more strict than putting them in the campaign, the main reason being in the campaign you just play by yourself against the computer so a lot more things can be overpowered, a lot more things can work. But on the multiplayer side, we have to make sure that when you put a new unit, it’s needed for that race. O of our biggest goals in HotS development was make sure to locate certain problems within a race. For example protoss vs terran late game, terran does not have a straight-up counter option against mass charge zealots, so what they have to do right now is use heavy micro on their marine/marauder to kite and do hit and run tactics. So one of the new units we are introducing in HotS is the battle hellion and that option will actually let you go toe-to-toe against mass zealots and come out ahead for cost. Mech in HotS has its advantages and disadvantages. One of the latter is that it’s a lot harder to use for harassment as compared to marine drops or marine/marauder stim attacks onto undefended locations. A mech-based strategy will be a bit more solid, defensive, whereas bio will be similar to what it is now – you will be able to move around, attack different bases around the map and we think that now the two strategies will be viable and it’ll be a player’s choice about which strategy to use. We are just focusing all of our effort to make HotS as best as we can, we haven’t started working on Legacy of the Void yet. But once we release the game and once we check how the units are actually playing out, and if they are playing as intended or better than intended and after several patches maybe we can start working on LotV. I think it’s a mix of everything – from the patches that we do to as well as feedback and suggestions from the community. It also has to do with pro-players and how they improve the game. So for example we still see new units and strategies being utilized at the pro level even though no changes have been done to them. So I think it’s a combination between everybody working hard in that direction as well as pro players leveling up their skill to fix other problems. It feels pretty cool that everything’s working out for the better so far. In the beginning of StarCraft 2, a lot of people were complaining that marauders were OP. I think it’s on a case by case basis and sometimes we get it wrong. Sometimes we think this is only a temporary thing and that problem will work itself out as payers try different strategies or improve their micro skills. But we do try our best to make sure that certain problems will last a certain duration and if so we try to react quicker. But generally speaking because the state of the game right now is pretty solid – for example this morning I checked the highest ranking KR grandmaster – and all the matches were actually looking pretty solid. And that’s probably the closest data to the pro-level that we can get from the ladder and we’re also looking at major tournaments around the world and when we examine the last eight major tournaments, the race make-up is pretty even as well. So if the balance is OK, we’ll try not to make super quick judgments but rather we’ll wait a little longer and we’ll wait for player-based solutions a little more than if the numbers weren’t looking so even. We are looking into deeper strategies as well, especially when proplayers suggest that there’s an issue. Even though the match-up is good, certain strategies might be problematic. For example, one of the things we looked closely recently was the PvT issue that was brought up both by the community and the pros. They say that in the mid-game, terran has a huge advantage and protoss almost has no chance, and in the late game it’s the opposite. So we looked into it in great detail and it was true that terran had the mid-game advantage but only about 10% so it’s 60% chance to win mid-game and in the late-game it’s flipped the other way. So we’ve been looking into this for a few weeks and just today we’re not seeing that all of a sudden, and we made no changes which means that probably the players have found a way around that issue – maybe they’ve found different timings – but we will continue to follow this issue on a regular basis to make sure that this is not problematic and if it is we’ll try to take measure to address it. I guess the units that really change up how the strategies work impress me the most. For example, the tempest has 22 attack range, there’s nothing that even comes close to that, and if we can actually make that work within the game that would be really cool. And I’m sure people that are not used to it think it is pretty crazy – and to us it seems pretty crazy too – but I’m sure we can balance it out and if we succeed that would be really great, because it will be a totally new strategic option that we provide to the game. We tried to make the tempest similar to the carrier, but better. Both units attack both plains, both have siege range, but what makes the tempest better than the carrier is that it has 22 range, which is over double the range of the carrier. So in this build, we removed the carrier, put the tempest in and tried to match the roles as best as possible so that we can test out if there’s an area that the carrier misses and the tempest can fill. So what we see in internal games is that if you bring the tempest, you can start using them solo until the enemy brings out air units, because nothing on the ground can actually reach the tempest. And even when the air units are out in play, the tempest can actually be used solo nonetheless because of the recall on the new mothership core. And one of the other major uses is you set up your whole army in a choke point, let’s say in 20 range of your enemy base or army, and you defend that location using force fields, splash damage units, you chip away at enemy units and that’s a very core use as well. So it’s true that the difference between the ranges of your army and the tempest is very big, but you are getting significant advantage by damaging their tanks, or immortals or other core units. For the moment I think foreigners are doing really well. Surprisingly so, Thorzain isn't and a lot of people weren't expecting that. He made his way through the open bracket - wasn't really a hard one as he was very highly seeded, I believe he might have been #1 seed actually - and then he got stomped by Symbol and MarineKing. But we've seen a really good play from Grubby and from Socke. They've been playing extremely well, I mean Socke beats DRG and Oz - I'm sorry, what? - just incredible stuff. And Grubby has been doing so well too, I've been really impressed with his play. Aside from that, we have our usual favourites, although I'm surprised Symbol isn't doing so well. He had an early 0-2 which was unfortunate and he did end up getting annihilated by MarineKing, someone who he's historically been able to beat. But apart from that it's so far, so standard. Yeah! I think he has exceptional endurace and as a result he tends to perform really well at MLGs. He doesn't win them but I still think he's one of the most consistent foreigners and him and Grubby are certainly the most consistent foreign protosses when it comes to dealing with major tournaments. And Socke is consistently underestimated. Grubby isn't, Grubby has that flare that Socke doesn't really have but Socke I think is the more rounded player. And we constantly see surprises from him, for example the Spring Arena 2: his builds against DongRaeGu were very interesting, very aggressive and this time around he managed to nail him to the wall. So I'm eager to see more of him in the championship bracket. I just hope his traditional Socke look doesn't come back and hit him in the face. So many times we've seen him do extremely well and then he loses the advantage. He's just so unlucky. Yes, he did. I think he'd do better this time, though, his play in the groups has been incredible. He looks unbelievably dominant, untouchable, and I think we'll see him go very far in the championship bracket as a result. He's going to have great placing and seeding but what does that really mean? Will he still be able to advance? Well, that's a good question but regardless he has been doing incredibly well. I hope he doesn't get any more ZvZs - we've seen a lot of that since the latest patch swinged the things into their favor - and he doesn't seem to have quite nailed that down yet. And there are very few zergs that have, actually: Symbol, NesTea, Idra's ZvZ actually is quite good when he can keep his composure. But aside from that, very few players have that match-up mastered. At the moment watching the KeSPA guys, especially based on the games you just mentioned, is watching really high APM monsters. It's weird because they don't quite understand the game - and why would they, they haven't got the chance to practice that much. What scares me is what they can do right now, their control is exceptional, but their mechanics and macro are somewhat behind I feel. They have some weird ideas about how the units should work and it's going to shift the meta-game one way or another. I'm intrested to see it from a novelty perspective. For the tournament: I like it that it's here, it's very much a fanservice to the BroodWar fans. I'm interested in watching it, I'm glad I am not casting it, because compared to everything else we've been casting, it's a lot different experience and needs to be put in context, and I think to do that you need people that have been embedded into the BroodWar scene. So Tastosis will be handling that and I'm sure they'll do an amazing job. I haven't really tried it but from what I've seen, I'm glad that they got rid of the shredder, it was a terrible unit. We don't need more passive units and I think the replacement in the widow mine is nice because although it seems like a passive unit, it really isn't. You can pick it up in a medivac, you can drop it at specific places, so it's a bit more active zone control than what terran currently has and you can micro against it - it's difficult, but it's doable. The warhound is one of the most boring units I've ever seen. It really is dull. It's an anti-mech unit and it's got auto-aim rockets that once again makes you not have that many micro opportunities. It's nice that it's hopefully going to break the ridiculous tank wars so I like what it represents, I don't like it's implementation. The protoss has nice stuff. I like the idea about the mothership core, it's nice to not have it removed but see it continuated somehow from a lore perspective and it's got a lot of nice abilities, we're going to see a lot more recall as a result. Which is great, I think recall is a very clutch spell that we rarely get to see because of lack of motherships and you have to save your energy for a vortex. Yeah, and in these matches you're not going to recall, are you. You have brood lords, I have vortex, GG. The oracle looks great, I really like the idea of mining denial and it's a raider that doesn't kill things and that's what makes it interesting. As for the zerg, the viper now just looks crazy. I imagine they're probably not going to let it move massive units as it just seems silly right now. As for silly: the tempest. 22 range, really? But as terran, I look forward to the possibility of playing sky terran against them, which is exciting as it means I get to use battlecruisers again. Yes, they do. They seem to be easily overwhelmed by viking/raven and maybe BCs as well. Swarm host is a really interesting unit, I like the idea that you have that perpetual siege going on which forces terran players to actually go out there and deal with it, you can't just sit there. As a terran player, I don't like that style of play and I've always thought the siege tank to be the most boring unit in the game. Many people will of course disagree with me - but it's iconic! - but it's dull. And any unit that makes tanks being used less is good. Yeah, it'd certainly be good to see players like Jinro, for example, to have a proper resurgence, because he's been battered to the ground so much and it's so sad to see because he's a great guy but he's in a slump that we don't see in any of the pros at the moment. Even Nony is doing better. So it was sad to watch, certainly. I think some creative players might get a brief resurgence before everything gets mixed up again. What I can certainly tell you is that it will be a very clunky transition. There's gonna be imbalance problems, there's gonna be dominance of certain races no doubt, even with all the beta testing, to the point where I would be interested to see whether or not players decide to play only in WoL tournaments until everything's evened out. I think it's impossible to predict KeSPA at that time because we don't know how good they are, there's not big enough sample size. Everybody is like "Ooh, Flash" but he lost to Desrow at the end of the day. Not to say that Desrow is bad, but more to the point Flash lost to a mid-tier foreigner which is not something you expect from someone like him. For the WCS, Vibe's been on a tear and if he gets another zerg in the final I would thoroughly expect him to dominate that. Admittedly, Daisuki is a bit unpredictable, cheesy and is willing to all-in which might give him some edge but in a longer series, especially with Vibe having the WB advantage, I don't see Vibe losing that. In regard to the Spring Championship, it's really hard to predict because even the champions are taken down in pool play games. You can throw in the usuals such as DRG, MKP but right now Inori is looking pretty scary, oh my God, I don't know what happened. I would say that if he doesn't freak out, MKP has the chance to at least go to the grand final, especially based on what he did to Thorzain. It wasn't even close, he could've been afk and still win the game, it was a pretty dire thing. And of course, Stephano can make a deep run, maybe Socke, so it's all up for grabs at the moment. It’s been OK, obviously I didn’t do as well as I would’ve liked to but I’m not really that practiced in general so I didn’t really expect too much. I fell short like one map from pool play again, same as Columbus, so it’s kind of annoying to have gone so close yet so far. But yes, I’ve enjoyed myself. I’m looking forward to the Barcraft tonight and that’s always fun. Suppy is really good player anyway, but the way PvZ is right now it's really tough in macro game at least. I really didn’t want to all-in although it was my best chance. I tried to play macro and it didn’t go too well. He took me out but he also took out Complexity’s Killer and MVPTails so he definitely knows how to play. Although he’s not that well known, I don’t feel bad losing to him. I don’t want to be big-headed and arrogant or whatnot but I too see myself as a favorite. I feel that Demuslim’s of the tough ones to beat. I played him twice now in tournament/showmatch situations and I’ve come on top both times so if we do meet I am pretty confident that I’ll be able to take him down. But there are other many good players also. JonhyReCCo has been playing really well and he’ll be just as tough as Demuslim since I am not feeling good against zerg lately. I think I can still take him, but I don’t think it’ll be easy. I think the toughest nation to beat is probably Poland because of Nerchio. And it’s not just the player, it’s the match-up in general. I didn’t see many of the nation qualifiers but I saw the Italian nationals and there was Jeal. I’ve never heard of him but he did beat Cloud and StarEagle and I didn’t expect that for one. Yeah, I think WCS is definitely the way to go forwards. At first, when Koreans were coming over to MLG it was really exciting. But now it’s gone to the point where foreigners stop coming because it’s no fun, we keep losing. We don’t do too bad against the Koreans, though, Sase and Stephano both came top six in this event. And it was because of their mistakes that they lost, it was not like they were completely outplayed. So we got pretty close but this WCS which cannot be filled with Koreans is very good. I think that every tournament that Blizzard is backing is going to be good no matter what. I’m looking forward to it and I’m excited to see how it goes. No, I wasn’t too interested in it, I just wanted to focus on my games. I saw some of the VODs and it seems pretty ridiculous right now, the units seem pretty crazy. But I guess that is what they want: the players to use them and come up with new strategies. Yes, they’ve usually done a good job with balancing in general. He said that? Oh, yeah, one of the fans stole one of my shirts. I think the whole thing got blown out of proportion and I don’t really know why he said that because that’s a bit mean towards me. I don’t really know what he said so I cannot really comment. Additionally, the Arenas are small in general so everyone that was there seemed kind of close and I didn’t expect the guy to do it. It was someone who won a trip to the tournament I think, although I am not sure. But it happens I guess. I’ll be more cautious next time with these. No idea about the WCS. I’ve never heard of Daisuki, I don’t know how good he is so I guess anyone can take it. I’m going to say Vibe because I’ve played him before. For the MLG finals, I have to say DRG because he is very good anyway and it’s ZvP so Alicia will have it a hard time winning two best of threes. He’s going into it with a disadvantage and it’s already hard enough. DreamHack Stockholm, with its three group stages and 128 players with skill levels varying from “Code S Uber Koreans” to major event debutants, had me skip the first day entirely and just tune in for the last few ecstatic hours. Just in time to catch every highlight: from Cytoplasm’s and Protosser’s fairy tales and their end, through the elimination of Puma, to DreamHack finding its first ever Swedish SC2 champion. There are a few changes in the player pool patterns - fewer Korean terrans, more Korean protosses and no Korean zergs – but the format is identical, the number of Koreans is still low and, overall, it’ll once again be a question of who is the best foreigner to challenge the eastern powerhouses. If Sase can be top four in a traditionally Korean-dominated MLG, if Thorzain can blaze his way through Stockholm and if Stephano refuses to lose any games until the very final stages of a tournament, then DreamHack might just become the isolated isle of foreign paradise where the non-Koreans return every few months to remind themselves that they are still excellent in this game. Zergs are my favorites and because they are now OP because of the latest patch, they come first in this preview. Suck it, inferior races! The powerful agents of the overmind are reduced to small numbers in Jönköping but at least their most prominent breeds are attending. before reaching the playoffs. , two zergs that had a field day during the last DreamHack, reaching top 8 and top 3 respectively. eSports writers constantly put them in major tournament articles and with a good reason – given their results, both of them are safe bets. in mind of the competition Morrow and Cytoplasm will most likely face an early playoffs exit and Snute, Dimaga and LiveZerg are the epitomes of the wild spinner dolphins – they might just reward us with a beautiful acrobatics for our pleasure, but they might very well swim low and mind their own business instead. Hey, look! Here’s Thorzain and there’s Puma and if there weren’t also Taeja and Keen there would be nothing else to say about the terran line-up of DH Summer. , there still isn’t a major trophy that carries his name. I mean, "Top 8 Code S" is fine but "DreamHack champion" is finer. It pays better and is remembered longer. Arguably the best terran of team MVP, Keen often performs a great GSL run and an even more memorable GSTL show and then is put aside as people start discussing the strong of the day, inevitably forgetting the one who once all-killed SlayerS. All eyes are set on those two terrans now and not even the return of King Thorzain or Puma’s yet-another-championship-title-please application outweigh the importance of their well-doing. Naniwa, Sase and HuK. ToD, Mana and Elfi. Hero and JYP. It doesn’t. Get. Any sicker. As it is the tradition in the eSports community, the recently successful is the most successful so Sase and Hero comfortably sit in the armchairs that belong to the greatest leaders of the protoss race. highest quality Bo3’s in three days and before DRG lifted the trophy, Sase was the true winner of the MLG. Grand things are expected of Sase, including the very possible second DH championship for Sweden. without breaking too much of a sweat. Team Liquid has brought a lot of egg baskets to Sweden, but Hero seems to be the most reliable carrier of such goods. With 60%+ in every match-up on international stage, Hero is scary as hell. What he did the last time he visited Sweden is still clearly discernible even through the ruins that his wrathful depredation brought to Jönköping. He is here to take yet another championship and weed out the flimsy sprigs that are the hopes for a second foreign victory in a row. And he can’t go home with nothing less. Why did you feel that increasing repair costs was preferable to any other options? In WoW, the solution for stopping in combat rezzing from getting out of hand wasn't to increase repairs dramatically. It was to make everyone in combat if in the zone, to limit the number of rezzes possible, and to have bosses/mobs heal to full after a wipe. Don't mess up the solution to a problem you've already dealt with before. Massive increased repairs hurts players who seek challenges, who don't give up, and who want to clear through content instead of skipping it. It penalizes tanks, fresh 60s, and a playstyle you should be encouraging. This type of change pushes people to farm urns for 12 hours a day instead of playing the game. Please reconsider. Thanks. It's something we're still choosing a value on, we haven't settled on anything, but it's mostly a matter of degree. Let's say my repair cost after the change is 40K. How long does it take to get 40K? Current estimates are that if you are playing in Act 1 Inferno (to use as an example), vendoring the blues that you pick up, and running solely with the 75% gold find from the Nephalem Valor buff you'll make anywhere from 120K-150K an hour, easily. Since it takes 10 deaths to fully break your gear, you're basically looking at 30-40 deaths per hour. I don't know - that seems like a lot. But like I said, it's mostly a matter of degree. Would a 50K repair feel that much worse? How about 30K? 20K? One thing I can tell you is that the current 6-10K repair cost is a little silly in that context. I would totally accept if you think 50K is too high, but surely there's a correct answer somewhere in between. We're testing to figure out what feels right and that's the number that will go live. Why was elemental damage cut? Burning fire, heal stopping poison, stunning lightning, healing holy… they all would have been great additions to game play. Primarily due players preference of DPS over everything. As we played the game we found everyone just moved to the damage type that did the most damage. If we equalized damage they ignored ones that didn't have CC options. Case in point, we kept the slow on cold and gave it a lower damage budget and its the least used damage type now. I played the Act 2 demo at Blizzcon 2009. There were far more events and side areas, such as cultists in a ritual, or a bunch of merchants tied up by Fallen. In fact, there were more people around in general, and it made the zone feel rich and alive. Now Act 2 is, well, deserted, and all zones have far fewer events on each playthrough. Why and when did you decide to cut back on the number of events? The randomization of events in the Blizzcon demos did not have events sometimes 'not' roll, because it was a demo. We didn't cut events, we just allow them not to roll so you can encounter things you've never seen before. Is there any plan to add a "free play" mode after clearing an act/difficulty where all bosses are alive, all way points are up, and no quests are required? I find the forced repeat of the story adds a great deal of tedium and diminishes replay value. No plans for this currently. We wanted the game to have a greater focus on story, and so decided to have a linear quest flow so we could advance plot and world changes. Creating a free play mode would be a major reworking of all our content. I'm not opposed to us adding a 'auto-skip' cut scenes option at some point. I really hope that future content is designed with our wish for free-roam in mind. I promise we'll keep this in mind. I don't think the complaint is invalid, just not easy for us to do given current game structure. What Game Mechanics/Design Decisions do you think have been the most successful and the least successful now that we are three weeks past release? Most Successful: Nephalem Valor. Skill System with runes and rune unlocking as you level up. Being limited to 6 skills and making tough choices. Jeweler and gem combining Things that didn't work out as well as I had hoped: Dragging a skill by accident off your hotbar and losing your NV stack (grrr.... has happened to me twice so far). Blacksmith being tuned for a person who never uses the AH (even though everybody uses the AH). Skill diversity could be much better that it is now. Most interesting Zone: The Rampart. Just sayin' (PS - there's a lock action bar option coming in the future.) Have you seen this article? If so, what do you think of it? Alright so I'm going to take a stab at this question. As mentioned in a different thread, the drop rates were carefully tuned for a single player playing through from 1 to 60 without ever using the AH. All of our items are randomly generated, and so follow a distribution curve in power. Let's say for the sake of argument that you were to somehow distill an item down to it's "power level" and created a distribution graph of drop rate vs. power level. This graph would probably be normally distributed with outliers at high power levels dropping at a lower rate. Looking at this graph, an average item drops every 5 minutes, a higher power item drops every 15 minutes, even higher power drops every hour. etc. As you move up the curve to ever more powerful items, the amount of time it takes to find such an item increases. This is what makes certain items more desirable, this is how things worked in D2. What happens for a standard player who is playing solo when they first hit level 60 is they see an item upgrade every 30 minutes or so. Pretty quickly it becomes every hour, then every 2 hours. The higher the power level of your gear, the longer it takes to find your next upgrade, that's just the underlying math of this distribution. It's not really anything we set either. If we magically made all drops rates 10x higher, all it would do is shift the power curve left or right, it would not change the fundamental property that the higher up in power you go, the longer (statistically) it is going to take until you find your next drop. So then let's say you visit the Auction House and get infusion of power that hurls you forward on that power curve. So whereas at one point your gear may be at a point that you are statistically speaking probably going to get an upgrade every 2 hours. After visiting the Auction House you hurl yourself forward on the power curve so far that now you are statistically going to get a drop every 8 hours. To further illustrate the point, let's talk about the coming changes in 1.0.3. In 1.0.3 we're going to start dropping level 63 items in Act I of Inferno. We're also reducing incoming damage. What do I expect to happen? I expect that there will be a rapid increase in power across the entire community as all of these items become more widely accessible. It's like we took the distribution curve of items and made everything drop more. That item that used to take 10 hours to find is now a 2 hour item. An item that used to be a 2 day item is now an 8 hour item. After the initial frenzy of power increase, things are just going to settle again. People who think drop rates are too low now will probably still think drop rates are too low a week later when they move to the new point on the curve. I've spent a long time on this question so I'm going to move on but hopefully somebody who gets what I'm saying will be able to expand on it more, maybe draw some graphs to better illustrate the point. tl;dr we could make drops 100x what they are now and it would just cause everybody to settle at a new equilibrium point. Anything you can farm in a few hours you'll already have, anything that takes longer you'll wish you could get faster. I would just like to know what you think about this idea: Add a new gold sink, similar to WoW's reforging, where you pay gold to have a reroll on a chosen stat to a new random stat and random value. Thank you for all your hard work! It's a cool idea. Saying that in no way confirms that we will or won't add such a feature in the future. After the bonus damage is removed from co-op play, are you going to nerf the defensive "group buffs" that some classes have that currently all stack? (Damage reduction, bonus armor and resists to your party, etc.) No, not as a result of this change. We reserve the right to make changes in the future if we think they will make the game better. With the drop rates released in the 1.0.3 preview, is Whimsyshire considered part of Act I or Act III/IV? We dont really consider the Whimsy-ical Shire to be part of the story proper, but the new drop rates will affect it. Specifically, the monsters in hell are considered act IV hell monsters, and the monsters in Inferno are Act III/IV Inferno monsters. Lack of transparency about how combat math works: Reports are coming in that many game mechanics do not work as they're reported to the players, if they're reported at all. Life Leech is nerfed in Inferno with no report to players; Life on Hit is modified on an ability-by-ability basis with no report to players; "chance on crit" runes don't provide any info on proc chance, or ICD's if any exist; certain monsters are immune to certain cc's (stuns, knockbacks, etc.) based either on type, champ/elite status, or based on which ability is used (runed Seismic versus Ground Stomp stun, for example;) no info was ever given on how bleed DoTs work (stacking, rolling, resetting.) The list goes on, culminating in the fact that since Inferno mobs are of a higher level than the character, many of the character details about defense are useless even if technically correct. Where is this information? Why don't players have access to it? If you want players to make smart choices about gearing and speccing, shouldn't this information be transparent and readily-available? A loot system that hides things isn't more complicated, just more frustrating - especially for novices; it's like trying to make 2+2=4 harder by hiding the plus sign under the sofa cushions. Arreat Summit is pretty awesome, right? Well, it wasn't there day one. We're three weeks in and playing the game with the audience, fixing exploits, addressing other game concerns currently is higher priority for us than providing tools for those who want to theorycraft. Not saying this is not valuable, or that we don't want to do it, but some things take time. I don't even think it's about "theorycrafting". Having that information available is definitely helpful, even to beginners. It is always better to have more information. How am I supposed to know that Life Steal is nerfed in Inferno? It doesn't make any sense at all to withhold this information from us. PS. Loving the game! Great job. Edit: Changed LPH to Life Steal. The argument still stands though. Maybe theorycrafting is the wrong reason, but the reason is still the same. It just takes time. :) Are you going to change/buff certain skills/runes that are never used? Wyatt Cheng: YES!!! Trivia: The least used skills at level 60 are Energy Twister, Exploding Palm, Sacrifice, Ancient Spear and Strafe. Can you please explain/reconcile the disparity between melee and ranged in this game? I'll state up front that I do think there's a disparity between melee and ranged, and I would like to see that closed. I feel like if I talk a lot about thought processes and design philosophy and don't state this up front people will lose the forest for the trees and conclude we think everything is fine. So I'll say it again: melee vs. ranged disparity is not fine, changes are being made, and even if you disagree with the approach outlined below we can hopefully have the common ground that the current situation needs improvement. It may not look like it on the surface, but a large number of the changes in 1.0.3 are actually targeted at closing the melee/ranged gap. Let me go through some of them. I'm going to use Hardcore as a starting point. In Hardcore, there's actually a reasonable distribution of classes, and I don't think the melee vs. ranged disparity is as large. There are a lot of Hardcore players of every class in Inferno without a huge disparity. Why is this important? It's because a significant portion of the melee/ranged disparity is related to a ranged character's ability to progress even while dying. A melee player can throw themselves at a monster and die, doing almost no damage to an elite enemy. A ranged player can do a huge amount of damage to an elite enemy, die, respawn, and basically attrition the enemy down with repeated deaths. In the Hardcore environment where a single bad Mortar, Vortex, Jailer, or Reflects Damage will kill a glass cannon-ranged character, the disparity between ranged and melee is an order of magnitude less. One of the more controversial changes in 1.0.3 is the increased repair costs. The design intent of these increased repair costs is to make death more meaningful. One of the top arguments we see against the increased repair costs is "I'm already dying dozens of times to make any progress in Inferno. Don't you see this is going to make this impossible?" This concern is most often brought up by ranged glass cannons. Many melee players respond "increased repair costs seem fine" because they haven't been using death-zerging as a tactic. Melee can't easily death-zerg an enemy down, but ranged can. I don't think the answer is to make death-zerging more attractive for melee; I'd rather make death-zerging a less profitable strategy for ranged. We're also looking to adjust the damage and health of enemies in Inferno Acts II, III, and IV. This is another change that is primarily for melee with secondary benefits for ranged. A lot of ranged are building glass cannon with the mentality "well, I'll just try not to get hit at all." So, reducing incoming damage when they weren't taking any before isn't significant for them, whereas reducing incoming damage for the melee is a big deal. For the ranged classes, I'm hoping that the incoming damage reduction will make some survival stats more appealing to ranged classes. While before the damage was so large it just felt pointless to try and mitigate any of it at all, after the change hopefully ranged classes will think "well, if I just put on a modest amount of survivability, I don't get 1-shot, so that's worth it." There are some ranged players who are already doing this -- stacking survivability so they don’t have to endlessly kite -- and it just feels like the minimum amount of survivability to avoid the 1-shot is so large it's unattainable. That's one of the things 1.0.3 seeks to address. Another change which is targeted at improving life for melee is the reduction in co-op damage. Again, since many ranged players just build glass cannon and avoid damage completely, they didn't really care if incoming damage went up as other players entered the game, but the melee characters really noticed. It was very easy for your life-on-hit to have you at a steady equilibrium, but as soon as another player entered the game your life-on-hit was no longer covering the incoming damage and death became imminent. And finally, there are always minor polish adjustments designed to help melee -- such as the AI on some monsters (BEES!!!) being tweaked to run away less often, which again helps melee more than ranged. I actually spent some extra time the other day to make sure if a Sand Wasp runs away from you, and you start chasing the wasp, it doesn't turn and shoot 4 bees in your face (hopefully that makes 1.0.3). I'm also working with one of our gameplay engineers to make it so if you sidestep the Dark Berserker’s power hit (where he brings his giant mace down), he doesn’t turn to track you as he swings (though that change probably won't make 1.0.3). These kind of AI adjustments are things ranged players don’t even notice, but are huge for melee. Another adjustment being made is increasing both the maximum range and the dead zone of Mortar. Mortar was specifically designed to be an anti-range affix, but many ranged players would just stand even farther away, whereas melee would sometimes get caught in the cross-fire of two Mortars. Increasing the maximum range and the dead zone helps with both of these. I'm currently playing a Demon Hunter in inferno. Basically any demon hunter right now going through inferno is going to bring 3 abilities no matter what; Smoke Screen, Preparation, and Sharpshooter. More of than not, these abilities are usually accompanied by Steady Aim, Archery, and Elemental Arrow (Nether Tentacles rune). Do you have any plans regarding the demon hunter to promote build diversity? I mean right now I’d love to create a build revolving around the passive Ballistics (increases rocket damage) which you unlock at level 60, but as of now as far as I can tell right now it’s complete trash. Yes, we're keeping a close eye on build diversity for all the classes, looking at abilities that are over, and more importantly under-utilized. We'd like to take the approach, when we can, to buff under-utilized abilities over nerfing. Yes, that hasn't been the case so far, but we haven't done a 'true' class balance patch, just hot-fixes on things we considered grossly overpowered. Class changes focused on improving diversity will be in an upcoming patch (not 1.0.3). As it is, life steal is useless. I can hit for 20k and only steal tens of damage while my lifepool is 40k+. Life steal is obviously limited in quantity to keep it from being over used, but with the 80% reduction, it's a wasted mod. Is there any plan to make life steal remotely useful compared to life on hit? Please don't take that as nerf life on hit. I'm happy with where Life on Hit is and keeping an eye on Life Steal. Life Steal was far and away the best stat internally, which is why we put in modifiers to reduce the effectiveness at higher difficulty levels. A lot of theorycrafters have (correctly) ball-parked the effectiveness of Life on Hit as being roughly 3x as strong as Life Steal. So it's probably pretty easy to see that before we put in the 80%, Life Steal was 2x as good as Life On Hit. We knew we had to do something. We played with numbers as low as 10%, and as high as 50% penalty. The reason Life Steal settled at 20% is because over the next few months, the relative value of Life Steal will probably go up, whereas Life on Hit will not. Both of the stats scale with mitigation, and both of them scale with Attack Speed at the same rate, but Life Steal scales with your weapon damage and damage output. Life Steal also scales better in AOE situations. To make a long story short, Life Steal is tuned around where we expect DPS output to be months from now. As people do more damage, get more survivability, and generally find they can AOE things more than they used to, I expect the value of Life Steal to go up. Isn't there a way to make the stat more interesting then needing 120k DPS to start using? Like putting a per-hit cap on life steal that scaled with vitality? One of the things that feels bad about the reduction is that it drastically drops the effects of certain abilities (shadow power, ignore pain's lifesteal rune) when moving up in difficulty. Yeah, it's definitely something to keep an eye on. We discussed putting caps on. At the end of the day, we decided that Life Steal is a stat that can, someday, let you feel like you break the game, and putting a cap on things would just be keeping you from attaining that feeling. There are lots of "breakpoints" (as I like to call them) in the game. I love games that exhibit breakpoints. Points where you're following one strategy, but as soon as you hit some magic breakpoint you can suddenly do something you couldn't do before. That point where your archon goes from 25 seconds to INFINITE. Yay! That point where your life per hit is completely mitigating all incoming damage. That point where you have enough crit to perma-CC all non-elite monsters with certain builds. One of the things that absorbs a lot of mental energy is trying to create that feeling that you "broke the game." No level requirements on gems and reduced level requirements going as high as 18 are two examples of this. I love things that make the player feel like they broke the game (as long as it is, in the grand scheme of things, not going to ruin it). Anyways, to bring it all back around, I think Life Steal will come into its own in the future, as it scales exceptionally well with gear. If a few months from now if people still aren't using Life Steal, we'll probably make changes. The math you are using is not accurate. You can get 1500 life on hit with one weapon. Assuming you are getting the max 3% from a comparable weapon, that is only .6% in inferno. That means you would need 250,000 DPS to match the life on hit just from one weapon. You can get 1000 more from rings and amulets bringing it up to 2500 life on hit I should add that life steal was tuned with multiple targets taken into account. You can also co-ordinate the popping of cooldowns to coincide with Life Steal, which is not something you can do with Life on Hit. For example, I like to pop shadow power before I use rain of vengeance. I'm curious what dps is expected as the game progresses when you need to do something like a 100k hit to get comparable health with a max (3%) life steal weapon, to a decent 600 Life on Hit weapon. It depends on what skill you're using and how many targets you're hitting. Life On Hit uses our proc coefficients, and I've seen people measure out all the proc coefficients (nice work btw!). Proc coefficients, btw, are used for a lot of the "On Hit" effects. If you ever see "X has a chance to Y on critical hit," it's using the exact same proc coefficients as Life on Hit. The Wizard skill Critical Mass that reduces cooldowns by 1 second is a good example. People test this and say "Oh wait, it only works with single target skills." That's not actually true. Single targets kills generally have a proc scalar of 1. Skills that hit 6x as fast (like rapid fire) have a reduced proc scalar to normalize out the proc effects. Frenzy has a 0.75 proc scalar, which affects the Life on Hit, but if it were a Wizard skill would also have a 75% chance to trigger Critical Mass on crits. But, back to your question. Life on Hit is proc scalared down for certain skills, whereas Life Steal is not affected by the proc scalar at all. So, if you Seismic Slam or Whirlwind a large number of targets, it will surpass Life On Hit faster than for Frenzy. Of course, on single targets, Life on Hit will generally always be better. In terms of where the breakpoint is, I think what you'd want to look at is breakpoints for various DPS levels for different skills for different numbers of expected targets. This is fine and all but this line: "I think Life Steal will come into it's own in the future, as it scales exceptionally well with gear - if a few months from now people still aren't using Life Steal, we'll probably make changes." This makes me very nervous. How difficult is it to put these numbers on paper and simply figure out with math when a stat will be 'worth it', when it will be 'good' and when it will be 'broken'. The answer is that it's not hard. How can you design the system for a game like D3 and not at least have a target in mind. something like "At this difficulty with this expected gear, we want players to steal up to X%/Y HP as a function of DPS Health/Z Health per second/shot/spell." I understand that picking such a number can be pretty difficult but even that can be derived based on what you want the function of life steal to be. See, it's things like this that make me incredibly nervous. If your approach to balance and system design is, "Well, lets see if the stat is attractive to players and then nerf/buff based on that", something is seriously broken in the decision-making phase of 'making the numbers work'. It's phenomenally frustrating to see the developers in charge of the systems of game like this literally say, "If it's not attractive, we'll buff it". No! That's not how balance works. You should be able to tell me the value of life steal at 30k, at 60k at 120k DPS. You should be able to tell me what exactly those breakpoints you mentioned are and Youshould have already planned their existence, and their means. You should be able to look at Lifesteal and point to a number and say, "Here! This is when Lifesteal becomes attractive". You should be able to take it a step further and say, "If you have this much health, this much damage and this much lifesteal, More DPS actually becomes more attractive than Effective HP as a survivability stat under these conditions." This isn't what's happening and it makes me both frustrated and nervous to play a game that's built under that design philosophy. Let me clarify. When I say "if a few months from now people still aren't using Life Steal" what I mean is that I think people will be using it. But I could be wrong. Humans being fallible and all that. I believe people will be using Life Steal months from now without us having to make any changes. I've done the math, I've got some spreadsheets, I've tested with chars. At the same time I'm not so arrogant as to say "You will ALL be using it 'cause I mathed it out!". I've been wrong many times before, I could be wrong on Life Steal too. Why are there no on hit procs besides bleed? The unique tulwar that cast chainlighting and charged bolt was one of my favorite items in the game. Will skills on hit make a comeback? We actually do have some, like stun on hit, fear on hit etc, and we definitely wanted to do more! As it came down to the wire, though, we had to put them on hold. That said, we are working on updating the legendaries in an upcoming patch, and a big push for us is to try and get these proc powers in the game and working to make our legendaries way more awesome (that will be measurable in "legendariness meters"). By the way, a proc chance of 2% doesn't feel legendary. It needs to happen more reliably for it to be worth anything. I ran 2% by the legendariness meter and it proc'd pretty low, so we want it to be higher, and more legendary! There seem to be a lot of misunderstandings and conspiracy theories from people who believe drop rates are directly influenced by the AH (if an item is common on the AH its drop rates will be lowered in-game). That doesn't really make any sense, but maybe can you lay this notion to rest? It IS, however, reasonable that drop rates would be designed with the AH in mind, to avoid flooding the economy with powerful items. How did you approach this as a design challenge during development, especially without a working economy to test on? 3 weeks after launch, are the economy and player's gear roughly where you were expecting? The auction house has absolutely no effect on drop rates. There are conspiracy theories and misunderstandings, but I do want to re-iterate: there is NO interaction whatsoever. Bashiok mentioned earlier that we took the AH into account, so let me expand a little bit on that. The drop rates were tuned for a player who would never use the Auction House. For the majority of internal development, we didn't have an Auction House, and we all played using our own drops only. I've personally leveled multiple characters from 1 to 60 internally before the game came out using only drops that I found -- we all did. When we say we "took the AH into account," that means it's one of many factors -- i.e. some players will choose to play without trading, some players would play in a group of 4 where they share drops among each other, and some (as it turns out, many) players would use the AH. Three weeks after launch, players' gear is much higher than what we were expecting. When I killed the Butcher on Inferno for the first time, I was using a weapon with 492 DPS. There are also certain passives which are much more powerful than they were during internal development. One With Everything, for example, was basically never used internally because we didn't have an auction House. With the auction house, it feels like a mandatory passive. In retrospect we should have seen it coming. In the game's current state, though, it's a powerful Monk ability that gives Monks a big survivability boost and has some interesting (some would argue fun, others would argue negative) effects on gearing. I consider playing without the Auction House to be a very fun way to play the game. I'm personally planning on rolling some new characters that I'll set aside to be "no-AH/no-twink" characters. Much like in D2 when I would make a new character with a friend and we'd agree with each other not to twink our characters out. Why don't bosses guarantee decent drops on your first kill in Nightmare or Hell? This leaves 30-60 feeing VERY dull and boring because you're not getting your loot fix. It's not a question of how do I gear up, but a statement in that beating a boss that drops two bad blues is very disheartening and is a very NEGATIVE reinforcement for continued play This was my decision, and I'll start by saying that Wyatt and Andrew have talked me out of it. In a future patch (not 1.0.3) we'll add this. But so you know my reasoning I think this just moves the problem. Design intent is that at end-game we want you to stack Nephalem Valor (NV) and "then" kill bosses to make farming loot more interesting. To facilitate this bosses have to stop dropping tons of rares "at some point." My worry was that if it was at Inferno everyone would be like "WTF why Inferno hardest difficulty with worst loot!?!??!" instead of the current complaint. The reason I've decided my decision was wrong is the gap that exists between Normal first time drops and the NV farming of Inferno. Do you have any intention on having Hell or Inferno bosses to drop lower level gear in addition to higher level gear? Sometimes it's nice to find a low unique or set item to have a reason to roll an alternate character. I don't want to have to god-mode my way through Normal bosses in hopes to find only low level gear. Nice changes for Act 3-4 Hell and Inferno bosses, by the way. They do drop lower, just not anywhere near all the way to level 1. We used to have this, and we got overwhelmingly bad feedback internally on it, even when we turned the drop rate on low levels "way" down. In Diablo 2, from my understanding, magic find took the base item of a predetermined loot table, and gave you a higher chance of rolling a higher quality version of that item. In Diablo 3, this no longer seems to be the case and with loot tables being so vast now, magic find seems almost too arbitrary, it just doesn’t feel like it’s worth it. Could you explain exactly how magic find affects item drops in Diablo 3, as a lot of people seem to be unsure how the mechanic has changed from Diablo 2? The mechanic is exactly the same as Diablo 2, and as you describe it hear. And the loot tables are not more vast than D2 because we don't allow items to drop below level 50 in Inferno. Why can't I dye legendary items? I just chatted with our awesome artists about this the other day! We currently have some tech restrictions that make it unfeasible for us to do this. We definitely want to allow this though, and we are looking at solving the tech issues related to it. What do you think of addings gems to the Blacksmithing process to ensure a stat? Put a slot for a gem into the UI. If you add a chipped ruby, you're guaranteed a small strength bonus (5-10). If you put in a flawless square, you're guaranteed a large strength bonus (~100). A perfect star ruby would result in a MASSIVE strength bonus. You could also diversify by having weapons get the weapon bonus, helms get the helm bonus, and other getting the other bonus. New reagents could be added for IAS, XP, Gold, MF… This, actually, sounds like what you should have done with the Mystic. Crumbled Treasure Maps drop and give small MF bonuses. The Mystic can combine 3 into a Faded Treasure Map that provides a little better MF bonus. Et Cetera… The Mystic could combine reagents to grant guaranteed stats from items made by the blacksmith. I think its an interesting idea and something we would certainly consider adding in the future. Philosophically, the blacksmithing is intended to serve as an outlet for all those items that you picked up when doing butcher runs, but found them to be not worth putting on the AH, equipping them, or storing in your stash for your alt. You can salvage those items, and give yourself a chance to roll a really good one, turning your evening of farming into something of potential value. The randomness thats inherent in this system means that you may not get anything good, which we totally understand can feel pretty frustrating. To mitigate this in the short term, 103 will see a reduction in costs for crafting items from the blacksmith. Im hoping this makes pressing that button a little less intimidating, and that Haedrig sees more business! He has some orphaned kids now to feed you know!!! The thing is why would i salvage all that stuff for a small chance at getting a good item from the blacksmith when I could sell it and get more gold to spend on items that have the stats I want on the auction house? The intent is, why not? If youre currently just leaving all of those blue items on the ground and collecting a bunch of gold, why wouldnt you want to turn them into something of potential value rather than let the Treasure Goblins come and pick them up after youve run away? Crafting isnt intended to be better than the drops you can get from killing monsters, or maybe even the items you can find on the AH. It is intended to provide you with another outlet for the gold youre collecting. He meant that you sell the blues to the vendor, because the gold from that is more valuable then the mats you get Our hope is that by lowering the cost of crafting items (mentioned in the 1.0.3 preview), the choice between "should i sell or salvage this" becomes a little more interesting. Drop rates on Jewelcrafting and Blacksmith patterns seem very, very low. In about 150 hours on my main I've gotten a grand total of one of each -- fewer than the number of legendaries I've gotten. Any plans to increase drop rates a bit? Something to keep in mind about the smithing and jewelcrafting plans is that they only show up in Inferno, so that can impact how often you will see them. We deliberately set them low as it felt really bad to fill in your blacksmith and jeweler so fast. We may have erred on the side of too low however and I'm not against increasing the drop rates. As more and more people get into Inferno we will keep an eye on it and increase it in a future patch if we need to. What do you guys think about the current monster affixes and are you going to add more interesting powers or nerf the ones that are plain boring to fight against (Ex. Shielded minions)? We think there are some very complicated and challenging affix combinations in there. In some ways this can be a good thing as you can get a feel for how youre progressing as a player, and with your items. Suddenly that insane affix that you had trouble with awhile go is melting like butter in your dpsy hands!!! Thats a good thing, but sometimes they can just be WAY too challenging. Shielding and Invul minions are two of these. We are making some changes to these in 1.0.3. The shielding will cast less often to start with, and for the invul minions, the health of the monster you can actually damage is being lowered. Hopefully that helps get them to the tasty melty stage sooner! Some of the challenge presented by the monster affixes are meant to be "holy koala how do i mitigate this damage!!!!" rather than "cant catch me mister jailer man." I think that the variety of the monster affixes makes each encounter interesting in its own way. Forecasting some of those affix abilities more is something we would definitely consider While that sounds like a good idea, some classes are having an especially hard time with Invulnerable in ways that simply lowering the health will not solve. As examples, invulnerable minions + horde + fast amounts to a free root ability that can't be broken without a teleporting ability, and some builds find the Invulns using their bodies to block shots from the lead creature while the player is kiting. Do you have any plans to address these? Not sure if you all saw, but Wyatt actually posted about a bunch of changes that we are introducing with 103 earlier today. Part of the motivation behind these changes was to make the game a little less progression oriented challenging, and more about finding interesting and efficient ways to farm for item upgrades. We made some things easier, and we made powerful items more readily available for you. We think this makes the game a lot more fun. With less damage incoming, and generally better items to equip, you should find it easier to solve the challenge involved in some of these crazier monster affixes. All thats pretty high level though, and doesnt really help with the minute to minute situation of seeing "mother of pearl he has jailer desecrator molten extra health minion invlunerable eat all my cheetos drink my beer!!!". We all know that feeling when we go up against some of these crazier affix combos. We are keeping an eye on them, and we definitely arent against tuning the monster affixes or even making some of the class skills more readily able to handle those evil beer drinking zombies. It's not challenging. It's a gearcheck. There is very little depth to the combat as it is, because we are simply not allowed to outsmart the AI. You take away the control of our character and we can't do anything about it. On the Barbarian the skill Wrath of the Beserker is a MUST HAVE because it gives 15 secs immunity ( which the toolip does not say btw). But im pretty much screwed if i haven't killed the monsters within those 15 seconds. It doesn't require skill to use WotB, so even IF i killed the monster within those 15 seconds it wasn't because i was "clever" - but because i had good enough gear to take them down. Its a fine line to walk, because we really dont want the combat to be boring. Some of those "holy koala!" moments come from not having the skill on cooldown, but having it close, and for you to get this tense feeling in the back of your neck when you see your screen growing red. Right now I think that tense feeling can either show up too often, or can turn into a full red screen of death too often. I certainly have bad mouthed the tree hugging eucalyptus mammals quite a bit. We hope that reducing incoming damage helps with this. We also want to continue iterating on the class skills in future patches, spreading out some of this utility across some of the lesser utilized or interesting rune variants. Champion packs that run away (fallen shaman, bees in act2, flayers act3, etc cause problems with the inferno enrage timers. Any plans to tone down this annoying interaction? We have reduced how often some of these monsters run away, it will be going into 1.0.3. Why was the decision made to turn off elective mode and advanced tooltips by default? It seems the reaction most people have when they discover these options varies from rage to simply asking “why didn’t I know about this?”. The default tooltips don’t allow users to make informed decisions, and when you read the comments for YouTube videos you still see people asking how guys are using builds with 2 skills from the same category. You guys are savvy and awesome, but you aren't most players. We had 'overwhelming' feedback from internal testing of a variety of skill levels, including internal devs, usability testing, etc. The testing we did showed that the skill system and pure math in the skills was creating a lot of confusion for many players, and turning them off from the game. For this reason we won't surface these options more than they currently are, we simply don't see a good enough reason to risk push this up and risk hurting the experience for one of these players. I know this isn't what you wanted to hear. I know the fact that some people might be overwhelmed by or flat out prefer to not use elective mode and advanced tooltips seems incredulous, but there it is. We get tons of comments from players who are playing the game with their non-gamer friends and family, thanking us for making a game that appeals to gamers and non-gamers alike. Doing things like this equals more people in the Diablo community, which is good for the game as a whole and the community. Everyone who wants to play with elective mode finds it eventually, we're adding more in-game hints to point to it once you get past normal difficulty. But ultimately we don't think it's a horrible loss to play without these things while you're learning the game, even if you are an advanced player. Is there any plan to change the text color of gems and pages/tomes? I think it'd be nice if they stood out from normal whites. Maybe even potions could be red. We are addressing that in a future patch. We are looking at changing the text color for pages and tomes, health potions and gems in all difficulty levels. Also account-bound items, like the Staff of Herding. The Cow King got a little miffed when he saw that his staff was a white item. He said to me "Thats udderly unnacceptable!" We've changed the Staff of Herding and the items required to make it to stand out WAY more in your inventory in 1.0.3. Would it also be possible to add an option to completely filter out whites? I've heard arguments that it would diminish the "whoa moment" when a lot of items drop, but simpler gameplay should take priority, imo. Yea, we agree. We are looking at adding a way to enable players to turn on an option like this in the future. Awesome lobby system for D2. Why no lobby system for D3? Primarily because every player who plays the game was going to be in Battle.net, and we didn't want the main menu screen to be covered in avatars for everyone. We recognize that players want to be able to encounter other players in common areas to check out gear and socialize, and we're considering how we might add that functionality to the game at some point. Well forcing us to start up in /general is not the way ;) Fair enough, but this should have gone live at the same time we saved your chat settings from session to session, so if you leave a channel you stay left. :) (Which is coming.) Why isn't there an invisible mode for the friends list? This feature has been requested several times on the forums but there never has been an official response. If you don't want to add it could you at least give us a reason? I don't think we're hardcore against this. I do think there is a danger that people just instinctively turn this on and then complain that their friend's list is empty. However, we will consider it. About the dialogue and story. You brought in some nice talent to do the voices for the game (some examples being Jennifer Hale as Leah, Steve Blum as Zoltun Kulle, and my favorite, Claudia Black as Cydaea). However some of the lines of dialogue in the game just made me cringe. I mean Belial isn’t a great liar, Azmodan is constantly telling me what he’s doing, and "I AM THE PRIME EVILLLLL!" I know at Blizzard, gameplay always comes first which is great and I think you did a fantastic job, but that doesn’t mean story isn’t important; So uhh… no offense intended, but really, what happened? Did your QA team not say anything or what Agree to disagree? We get lots of compliments on the story and dialogue. It's a hard area to make everyone happy, and a lot of things we do to make goals obvious for some players make them feel over-stated to others. We never tried to make War and Peace, just a decent pulpy story about heroes fighting demons. The story of Diablo 3 has received a lot of criticism for both its actual content and writing and for its presentation (e.g. intrusive cutscenes and linear "on rails" progression). I love the game, but must admit some heavy disappointment when it came to furthering and enriching the lore of the Diablo universe. What lessons have you learned from the backlash that you plan to apply to D3's expansions or further games in the franchise (or even other Blizzard titles)? We answered this question in other threads, but the recap is: we disagree and have gotten mostly great feedback on the story. What percentage of players play on Hardcore, and how important is that game mode to the development team when considering changes to the game? The data I have on hand is from yesterday, at which time 4.1% of the characters are made in Hardcore. Hardcore is a super exciting way to play so it's very important to us. We take into account Hardcore for every design decision. I'll take this opportunity to mention I feel particularly bad about a few hotfixes that went in shortly after release that put the lives of some Hardcore characters at risk. You'll have noticed that after the initial handful of hotfix changes to skills in the first week there were many less skill changes - hardcore was part of the reason for the general stop/slow on skill changes. In hindsight, changes such as the Wizard Armor Force Armor hotfix should have been communicated in advance, and philosophically I absolutely want to see future changes that could put a Hardcore character at risk communicated well in advance through patch notes, patch previews, or the hotfix blog that has since been put in place. Could you post a breakdown of what classes are being used by HC players? Is it roughly 20% each or is it more unbalanced? Sure why not. I'll just pick 2 data points arbitrarily. Levels 46-50 -- where I think the game starts to get hard enough to risk death against serious players, and level 60. Level 46-50: Barbarian: 25.86% Monk: 23.90% Demon Hunter: 18.47% Wizard: 16.96% Witch Doctor: 14.81% Level 60: Barbarian: 22.67% Monk: 21.83% Demon Hunter: 21.04% Wizard: 19.23% Witch Doctor: 15.23% If you are pulling out a calculator to add all of these up to make sure it totals 100% with an intention to call me out of it doesn't, I Game 1 @ Ohana Game 2 @ Metropolis Game 3 @ Antiga Shipyard Game 4 @ Daybreak Game 5 @ Ohana Game 1 @ Daybreak Game 2 @ Metropolis Game 3 @ Antiga Shipyard Game 1 @ Cloud Kingdom Game 2 @ Entombed Valley Game 3 @ Daybreak Game 4 @ Antiga Shipyard Game 1 @ Metropolis Game 2 @ Antiga Shipyard Game 3 @ Cloud Kingdom Game 4 @ Ohana Game 5 @ Metropolis Lots and lots of zergs. This was the tagline of the very first day of the Team Liquid Starleague 4, which opened with a zerg player in every one of the four series played this Saturday. If only to bring the swarm hegemony to a whole new level, TSL's HyuN opened with a quick 2-0 against Major and for a moment it seemed that with our prediction for a 3-2 for HyuN we were giving the Mexican too much credit. Three series later, the Korean lay defeated and dying and it would appear that we had, in fact, given Major . The next two series went according to expectations with Curious absolutely destroying Lalush and Vortix taking a convincing victory against BabyKnight, unaffected by the Dane's wacky openings. The fourth and final series of the day saw two of tournament's best - Ret and Squirtle - engage in a five-game ZvP. Despite his numerous positional mistakes and the whimsical approach of building mass carriers in one of the game, Squirtle walked out the victory, leaving the Dutch TSL veteran out of the tournament. Major vs HyuN for the amazing reverse kill Game 1 @ Ohana Game 2 @ Cloud Kingdom Game 3 @ Metropolis Game 4 @ Daybreak Game 1 @ Daybreak Game 2 @ Ohana Game 3 @ Entombed Valley Game 1 @ Cloug Kingdom Game 2 @ Entombed Valley Game 3 @ Daybreak Game 4 @ Ohana Game 5 @ Antiga Shipyard Game 1 @ Ohana Game 2 @ Daybreak Game 3 @ Metropolis In day two, TSL 3 runner-up Naniwa faced up-and-coming Brit JonnyREcco in a series that should've gone decisively in Swede's favor, given his Code S top 8 status and all. However, Naniwa soon found out that Dignitas's newest addition is a hard nut to crack and the biggest punch JonnyREcco suffered - apart from that one loss on Metropolis - were Naniwa's parting words "Congratulations, you play zerg". Kas vs Fraer and Keen vs Welmu were painfully painfully unmemorable and dull in the victors' flawless 3-0 kills but same could not be said for Life vs Elfi, who played the absolutely most entertaining series in week one, indulging in nydus plays, compulsive cannon rushing, criminally early pools and more. After going neck and neck through the entire series, StarTale's crazy zerg earned his Ro16 spot. Elfi vs Life for being as far from your everyday PvZ as it gets. Baited by promises of barbeque, beer and even some money, thirty two players traveled to Take’s home in Krefeld, the free booze even attracting a handful of Koreans, GSL champion Mvp and reigning HSC winner MC included. Who knew that by the end of the weekend during which players took the roles of casters while the "real" commentators lost money on poker, the champion will be none other than Nerchio – a player everybody knows to being good but never considers championship material, ever. With a satisfactory smile on top of a “not bad” facial expression, Nerchio destroyed everybody without betraying for a second that this was some kind of an uphill battle against world’s best. Not to mention teaching zergs out there . The first half of 2012 was not too kind to Stephano, to be honest. Truly, he earned and achieved more than any other foreigner but it just wasn’t sufficient, was it? Silver at Assembly, top four at DH Summer and three consecutive MLG top eights were good and all but they weren’t just Stephano enough. The insatiability of his supporters was not satisfied, still going strong. After the loss to Mana in Dreamhack Summer, the confidence in Stephano’s ZvP was somewhat shaken. Not fully but just enough for the combination of HerO, MC and Alicia one after another to allow a sliver of doubt if Stephano can win NASL to slip in. If Mana – a player that hadn’t smelled intensive practice due to school duties – could do it, then surely at least one from the trio of Koreans would as well. As it turned out – no. Neither HerO, the PvZ conductor; nor MC, the player with the deadliest timing attacks; and nor Alicia, one who did not win a single map in the grand final series and is on the way to becoming the Stork of StarCraft 2, grabbing yet another silver trophy for his shelf. When Scarlett makes the headlines in this column, she’s usually in the “In People’s Mouths” section. It was not until the WCS Canada finals that she actually climbed her way up to the company of tournament champions and not being included just because people like to talk to her. Well, OK, I am partially lying because Scarlett and her smashing WCS Canada run was the fifth most read and most discussed news on GosuGamers for the past month, surpassing in popularity Stephano’s NASL victory, or Seed vs MC in the GSL and Gumiho’s all kill against Slayers. Absolutely understandable, though. Not everybody gets to defeat HuK, Ostojiy, Drewbie and Ddoro all in one weekend’s time, . There were many firsts in the last weekend of the GomTV leagues. In Code S, there was the first ever PvP final, the first protoss champion that was not MC and the first protoss gold for team Incredible Miracle making them also the first team to win Code S championships with all three races. Seed’s aggressive style marked by 4-gate prism all-ins and 1-gate blink builds brought him glory and fame but most importantly – it brought him the essential affirmation of his skill that every player who’s excelling at something direly craves for. At the very end of the month, FXO went against SlayerS for the GSTL title. With MMA’s demotion and Crank’s hospitalization, it certainly looked like SlayerS were not in their most stable state. What nobody anticipated, though, was that SlayerS could be outplayed so badly and come out so contrasting to the team that was once a back-to-back GSTL champion. FXO had too suffered a heavy loss in Oz’s departure but they still had Leenock, Lucky and Gumiho for ace players. As it turned out, they never even needed the former two. Singlehandedly, Gumiho slayed MMA, Min, Coca, Ryung and Puzzle for the 5-0 all-kill, the first in a GSTL Grand Final. Koreans have been known for taunting their opponents and in the better part of the cases, those call outs pass under the community’s radar. When DongRaeGu took it one step further, however, stating that he can beat foreigner’s hope Naniwa in whatever way he wishes, it got people talking. As everybody saw, the game was much closer than the taunt suggested and, in fact, DongRaeGu almost lost on a number of occasions, including the final seconds of the fifth game. When the said statement was reminded to DRG after the game, the master zerg just attributed this to his use of hydras and stuck to his previous words, saying that the series was much closer than it should’ve been. The most read news for the last month told the story of KeSPA players beating GSL players… Not like in “all over the place” sense of the word but within the micro-cosmos of the newly founded KeSPA/GSL cross tournament. This mini event had a simple format but one enough to stir interest in the hot topic: two GSL players each meet two KeSPA players in Bo3 and the winners go into a final series. The names of all, except that of the final winner, are hidden. It’s old school versus new school, anonymous style. What made this newspost so much more popular as compared to those about the other Cross Match weeks is that it actually featured a KeSPA winner. With the Brood War players currently in transition and practicing two games at a time, it was not expected of them to win more than one Bo3 and even that seemed like a stretch. After Woongjin's sHy (a.k.a. sOs) was announced as the first Cross Match winner, it all made sense. Who better to go neck and neck with the GSL players than a member of the best KeSPA StarCraft 2 roster there currently exists. On July 13th, the Korean pro-team ZeNEX ceased to exist as an independent entity and went through a merger with StarTale. The news talked about management problems in ZeNEX after team’s former manager departed in 2011, leaving his successor to sustain the team with his own money, the loss of their training house and the real danger of players such as Life, Extreme, Avenge and Kyrix ending up teamless. To ZeNEX’s luck, StarTale’s head coach and chairman of the E-Sports Association stepped in to suggest a merger so that both the players and ZeNEX’s management keep their employment under the StarTale tag. The acquisition was officially finalized yesterday, August 1st. “A new beginning, not the end” states the tagline for the first ever StarCraft 2 OGN Starleague. Yet “Not the end” proved to be the complete opposite of what many bonjwas and renowned Brood War players experienced. Jaedong, Stork, Bisu, Effort, Kal, Hero, Iris, Leta – all names with which Brood War and SC2 fans alike are familiar with – faced elimination right in the preliminaries, with the younger, up-and-coming generation advancing further. As of August 1st, Flash is the only bonjwa left in the OSL, although things might change after his dual tournament group on August 7th, and Fantasy and Jangbi – both seeded into the Ro16 – are the only two OSL champions that are certain to fight to defend their titles. Naniwa’s name is an absolute magnet for discussions so when at the very end of July he asked to be released from Quantic it was no surprise that the questions started raining immediately. Why? Was there another dispute with the team? Is he really no longer friends with Sase? Where will he train now and where will he go? Fortunately, Naniwa was quick to answer all of those in JP’s Real Talk, saying that the main reason for him leaving Quantic stems from team’s merger with Team Vile, which meant that there was an additional manager making calls, sometimes against what Naniwa was promised. Seeing promises not being fulfilled meant a parting of ways for the Swede. We don’t usually put our tournament previews in here as it brings the feeling of over-the-top vanity but we made an exception with this juicy and tasty article. While community boards and news sites were speculating who would win against whom in the Homestory Cup and does player X have a chance in group Y, two writers sat down to have a genuine fun time, comparing players in the tournament with barbeque ingredients. Featuring the “steaks” Mvp and MC, TLO “buns”, Idra the “chili sauce”, ToD the “burger” and Cloud and Monchi as the “fresh, healthy salads”, this Homestory Cup preview still remains one of the most easy-going and entertaining articles we’ve written in a while. As part of our post-Dreamhack Summer coverage, we approached the two finalists, starting with the champion MouzMana. Grzegorz walked us through his playoffs experience and how he beat the playstyles of Stephano and Dimaga, recent changes in the Mousesports’ roster and his dream to play in the GSL – something he will soon accomplish being part of the Up/Down matches for Season 4. A day later, we interviewed our dear friend Dimaga, minutes before he was to leave for Homestory Cup. Dimaga’s aggressive baneling style made for even more discussions than Stephano’s and HerO’s eliminations or even Mana’s tournament victory so we were eager to talk to the Ukrainian zerg about this and a whole lot of other topics, including why, in God’s names, doesn’t he consider the zerg Viper to be downright imbalanced, as is the predominant opinion in the community. After a three months of break, the satirical Marauder Flank column returned to the GosuGamers front page, bringing shocking truths about the Tempest. Those were discovered by our passionate reporter Andrei Filote, who was sent on a dangerous mission to find out what the hell the Tempest exactly is. Filote writes: “In the motion picture the Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, the walls of Minas Tirith are protected by mighty catapults which hurl massive slabs of rock into rows of defenseless orcs. They are splattered dozens at a time as the catapults mercilessly cast their load over the walls into the fields below, showing that after all the city can fight back. You probably didn’t notice but a prototype of the new Protoss unit, the Tempest, was also being manned by a team of defenders. If you, like me, are an ardent Lord of the Rings fan, you might be a bit distressed to realize you failed to notice such a crucial element, but in hindsight it’s not that big a deal. In fact 90% of zerg players we’ve interviewed also reported similar oversights, telling us that they “didn’t know toss had tempests” until the GG had been given and they had “started trashing toss for being so bad.” To close this monthly recap – which fortunately ended up being way shorter than my previous – I suggest you check out our newly launched monthly column that collects, organizes and provides a player list for all upcoming tournaments for the next month. With 13 tournaments coming in August alone, having them all catalogued under one roof shouts practicality on top of its lungs. March 2012 April 2012 May 2012 June 2012 29-20 59.18% 7 wins, 3 losses 5-4 55.55% 5 wins, 4 losses Points (4th) Although relatively new to the scene, IM_First has not been slacking around and has been busy making a name for himself with the speed of a high-velocity Japanese train. At MLG Summer Arena, he hit like one too, putting to rest four of the best Korean terrans, as well as Snute and Losira before finishing top four. At that point of time we asked “Who is First?” and now we know. Despite his recent successes, however, First’s televised PvP record is nothing to be too proud of, hovering at some very average numbers. To his luck, so is Daisy’s who’s still bound to the minor glories of the weekly tournaments and only now does he get the chance to shine in a tournament of higher esteem. In this situation, the only real ground on which one can build some predictiosn is who will prepare those players for the upcoming match. Truth be told, I take Seed over, well, nobody any given day. Prediction: First 3-1 Daisy 35-30 53.84% 4 wins, 6 losses : 298-174 63.14% 7 wins, 3 losses EU Qualifier #4 It is no secret that Mana loves PvT and a win rate of 63% is enough proof of that. He also disclosed to us that Korean terrans scare him not one bit and that made him optimistic about his GSL future. Those who follow the ongoing Assembly Summer will recall his insanely close series against Liquid`Taeja and will nod in agreement: Mana is all hat and no cattle. Furthermore, if he can win a tournament playing his worse match-ups against HerO, Stephano and Dimaga, what power would be able to stop him claim today’s PvT. Against the Polish sits Hack, a terran player who is barely staying afloat in Code A, displaying a style of play that is nowhere near impressive. Still waters run deep, however, and going back a few months ago, GSL fans will remember Hack being the one eliminating HuK from Code A with a 2-0. Recently, Hack also introduced some statistical stability in his TvP compared to the disastrous stats in 2011 and early 2012, making him a less predictable opponent. Expect a Mana victory but don’t count on it coming easy. Mana 3-2 Hack 93-91 50.54% 5 wins, 5 losses : 35-30 53.84% 4 wins, 6 losses Points (2nd) Thus far in the TSL 4, with the exception of Squirtle, protosses have been losing to zergs and not in a fun fashion (short of Life vs Elf). Sase here is given the chance to balance the stats a bit but facing Coca is not really what you call a guaranteed win. Earlier this spring, Sase finally lived up to the expectations sowed by his Korean practice and sponging know-how off of Naniwa by making a spectacular run through MLG Spring Championship, following it up with a top eight at DreamHack Summer. Sase never got a major gold finish but with Naniwa out of TSL 4, he might at least get the chance to come out of the shadow of his former team-mate. Opposing Sase is SlayerS_Coca, the zerg player who ever since his second place at Raleigh 2011 has been making sure that the scene does not forget about him. Although 2012 has not been as kind as last year which brought him two Code S top eights and said MLG silver, Coca has been mixing GSTL all kills with ESV/EWM first places to keep a steady pace of his tournament career. How appropriate that in his first major crusade for approval in 2012 he is playing someone who just recently was trying to do this exact same thing. Coca 3-2 Sase 67-52 56.30% 6 wins, 4 losses : 182-139 56.69% 5 wins, 5 losses Points (1st) We haven’t seen anything memorable from Select in a long, long time and as so I will use this face-off to impose the bold prediction that Dignitas’ terran will walk out torn to shreds. His TvP record lists losses to ToD, Mana, Real and even to the slumping HuK. In fact, his vP victories are mostly against players that have never been considered top protoss users. Creator is not of the latter. When the Prime protoss is not winning TSL qualifiers, he spends his spare time beating the likes of Jjakji, Maru, Gumiho and Happy, some of those matches part of a six-game win streak in May. Creator is new, fresh and hip while SeleCT’s good name still hangs on a few good finishes more than a year ago. Despite mostly known for hiz PvZ, Creator will be looking forward to exert some serious ownage onto the Dignitasee. Creator 3-0 SeleCT Build, Concept and Playstyle Cyclone Monk Build Calculator Required Level 56 Difficulty: Inferno, Hell Core skills: Sweeping Wind Hardcore Reliability: Moderate Extremely high damage Good mix between offensive and defensive stats Perfect for clearing large mob packs Expensive due to required crit chance / crit damage gear Lacks customization options Fragile when undergeared Cyclone monks are high DPS characters that rely on crit chance for Sweeping Wind and high potency to deal with packs of mobs due to the Sweeping Wind AoE damage aura. As Sweeping Wind is the core skill of this build, it is important to know how the damage of the AoE and the tornadoes is determined. When activated, Sweeping Wind will register weapon, meaning that dual wielders will have to be extremely careful about this. The tornadoes generated by Cyclone are not affected by attack speed so Sweeping Wind should always be activated with the high damage (not high DPS) weapon being active Upon activation of Sweeping Wind, its damage is modified depending on the buffs currently active on the Monk and this boost affect Sweeping Wind and not just for the duration of the buffs Once active, Sweeping Wind does not change its damage if the character receives buffs in the process. Thus, all buffs must be applied before casting Sweeping Wind Due to being a monster debuff and not a character buff, Aura of Conviction will change the DPS output of Sweeping Wind accordingly Having the aforementioned bullet points in mind, before engaging a mob pack a Cyclone monk will need to 1) switch to its high-damage weapon, 2) apply all buffs in his possession (such as Blinding FLash ) and only then activate Sweeping Wind to maximize its DPS. Skills and Justification The Cyclone Monk uses a healthy combination of offensive and defensive skills to balance between DPS and survivability. His active skills are mostly geared towards the first (seeing how even Blinding Flash and Breath of Heaven are runed for damage increase) while his mix of passives is entirely defensive, aimed to provide armor and resistances and to reduce enemy damage. ACTIVE SKILLS: Fists of Thunder Sweeping Wind Blinding Flash Breath of Heaven Serenity Mantra of Conviction - The teleportation effect of Thunderclap will become your best and most beloved friend. The mobility it provides will help the Cylcone Monk jump from target to target to maintain Sweeping Wind; will make it easier finding your way to high-prioriy but well protected targets; and will serve as an escape tool for dodging arcane lasers, plagued/desecration pools, frost bombs etc. by simply hopping to an enemy that is outside of their range. - As the build owes its names to this skill, it's not hard to deduce that this is the primary damage dealer here. Unlike Wizard's Energy Twister or Barbarian's Run Like The Wind/Dust Deviles, the tornadoes generated by Cyclone will damage nearby enemies and not just those standing directly in them. rune will provide both a defensive and an offensive bonus. As we mentioned beforehand, although the buff affects autoattacks for three seconds only, it will amplify the damage of Sweeping Wind for all of its duration if cast directly before activating. - Analogical is the case with Breath of Heaven. Unruned, the skill is a simple 7.5K heal with 15-second cooldown. Runed with Blazing Wrath, it's a direct 15% damage buff to sweeping wind and to all auto attacks. as the "Oh, shit!" panic button. Cyclone monks are no exception. - It's a straightforward 24% (48% for three seconds after activation) damage buff which, with high crit chance and crit damage, can almost get out of control. - The Monk version of Barbarian's Nerves of Steel. No brainer! - A most valuable buff to all resistances. Another very logical pick. - As Resolve is not limited to "damage from auto attacks" but to all types of damage, that automatically means that every enemy in the Sweeping Wind area of effect will have its damage reduced by 25%. Skill Build Customization Just like Blazing Wrath and Faith in the Light, after the third attack Foresight will give a permanent 18% bonus to Sweeping Wind's damage. Still, the larger part of the monks prefer Thunderclap's mobility to Foresight's DPS increase. for +20% dodge... ...and enjoy the waves of 35% AoE damage that Backlash will produce. Those two skills come in to introduce a more active spirit rotation in the place of the passive bonuses provided by Blinding Flash and Breath of Heaven. . Usually reserved for hardcore characters and almost never used in softcore as the 25% damage reduction by Resolve will usually provide more survivability than NDE. Itemization The Cyclone Monk is a dual wielder On both weapons, search for +Crit damage and sockets For main hand, search for high damage (not high DPS!) weapon and cast Sweeping Wind with it active Prioritize Crit Chance over Crit Damage over anything else For the other stats, prioritize Dexterity over All Resist over Vitality Gearing on a Budget Similar to the approach we took with the just as expensive Tornado Barbarian, we set a limit of 2 million to gear our Cyclone monk. Our first build had a good All Resist (~600) but too little hit points (below 25K), so we went back to make adjustments. Although we got the number on Hit Points a little higher, optimally a Monk should have at least 40K hp to be safe in late Act II and beyond. We used this Monk calculator to get the numbers we could not get by hand. 1,935,000 3,540 463 967 (1154 total) 728 (855 total) 29% (35% total) 178% (228% total) 12% (with Flawless Square Amethyst in Helm) 25,2K unbuffed 34,000 Image : Crit Chance 4.5%+Dexterity 100+ Crit Damage 30%+Dexterity 